pride & prejudice .
it is a truth universally acknowledged .
that a single man in possession of a good fortune , must be in want of a wife .
however little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his first entering a neighbourhood .
this truth is so well fixed in the minds of the surrounding families .
that he is considered as the rightful property of some one or other of their daughters .
`` my dear mr. bennet .
'' said his lady to him one day .
`` have you heard that netherfield park is let at last ? ''
mr. bennet replied that he had not .
`` but it is , '' returned she .
`` for mrs. long has just been here , and she told me all about it . ''
mr. bennet made no answer .
`` do not you want to know who has taken it ? ''
cried his wife impatiently .
`` you want to tell me , and i have no objection to hearing it . ''
this was invitation enough .
`` why .
my dear .
you must know .
mrs. long says that netherfield is taken by a young man of large fortune from the north of england .
that he came down on monday in a chaise and four to see the place .
and was so much delighted with it that he agreed with mr. morris immediately .
that he is to take possession before michaelmas .
and some of his servants are to be in the house by the end of next week . ''
`` what is his name ? ''
`` bingley . ''
`` is he married or single ? ''
`` oh !
single , my dear , to be sure !
a single man of large fortune .
four or five thousand a year .
what a fine thing for our girls ! ''
`` how so ?
how can it affect them ? ''
`` my dear mr. bennet , '' replied his wife , `` how can you be so tiresome !
you must know that i am thinking of his marrying one of them . ''
`` is that his design in settling here ? ''
`` design !
nonsense , how can you talk so !
but it is very likely that he may fall in love with one of them .
and therefore you must visit him as soon as he comes . ''
`` i see no occasion for that .
you and the girls may go .
or you may send them by themselves .
which perhaps will be still better .
for as you are as handsome as any of them .
mr. bingley might like you the best of the party . ''
`` my dear , you flatter me .
i certainly have had my share of beauty , but i do not pretend to be any thing extraordinary now .
when a woman has five grown up daughters , she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty . ''
`` in such cases , a woman has not often much beauty to think of . ''
`` but .
my dear , you must indeed go and see mr. bingley when he comes into the neighbourhood . ''
`` it is more than i engage for , i assure you . ''
`` but consider your daughters .
only think what an establishment it would be for one of them .
sir william and lady lucas are determined to go .
merely on that account , for in general you know they visit no new comers .
indeed you must go .
for it will be impossible for us to visit him , if you do not . ''
`` you are over scrupulous surely .
i dare say mr. bingley will be very glad to see you .
and i will send a few lines by you to assure him of
my hearty consent to his marrying which ever he chuses of the girls .
though i must throw in a good word for my little lizzy . ''
`` i desire you will do no such thing .
lizzy is not a bit better than the others .
and i am sure she is not half so handsome as jane , nor half so good humoured as lydia .
but you are always giving her the preference . ''
`` they have none of them much to recommend them , '' replied he .
`` they are all silly and ignorant like other girls .
but lizzy has something more of quickness than her sisters . ''
`` mr. bennet , how can you abuse your own children in such a way ?
you take delight in vexing me .
you have no compassion on my poor nerves . ''
`` you mistake me , my dear .
i have a high respect for your nerves .
they are my old friends .
i have heard you mention them with consideration these twenty years at least . ''
`` ah !
you do not know what i suffer . ''
`` but i hope you will get over it .
and live to see many young men of four thousand a year come into the neighbourhood . ''
`` it will be no use to us .
if twenty such should come since you will not visit them . ''
`` depend upon it , my dear , that when there are twenty , i will visit them all . ''
mr. bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts .
sarcastic humour .
reserve .
and caprice .
that the experience of three and twenty years had been insufficient to make his wife understand his character .
her mind was less difficult to develope .
she was a woman of mean understanding , little information , and uncertain temper .
when she was discontented she fancied herself nervous .
the business of her life was to get her daughters married .
its solace was visiting and news .
mr. bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on mr. bingley .
he had always intended to visit him .
though to the last always assuring his wife that he should not go .
and till the evening after the visit was paid , she had no knowledge of it .
it was then disclosed in the following manner .
observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat .
he suddenly addressed her with , `` i hope mr. bingley will like it lizzy . ''
`` we are not in a way to know what mr. bingley likes .
'' said her mother resentfully , `` since we are not to visit . ''
`` but you forget .
mama .
'' said elizabeth .
`` that we shall meet him at the assemblies , and that mrs. long has promised to introduce him . ''
`` i do not believe mrs. long will do any such thing .
she has two nieces of her own .
she is a selfish , hypocritical woman , and i have no opinion of her . ''
`` no more have i , '' said mr. bennet .
`` and i am glad to find that you do not depend on her serving you . ''
mrs. bennet deigned not to make any reply .
but unable to contain herself , began scolding one of her daughters .
`` do n't keep coughing so , kitty , for heaven 's sake !
have a little compassion on my nerves .
you tear them to pieces . ''
`` kitty has no discretion in her coughs , '' said her father .
`` she times them ill. '' `` i do not cough for my own amusement , '' replied kitty fretfully .
`` when is your next ball to be , lizzy ? ''
`` to-morrow fortnight . ''
`` aye .
so it is .
'' cried her mother , `` and mrs. long does not come back till the day before .
so , it will be impossible for her to introduce him , for she will not know him herself . ''
`` then .
my dear , you may have the advantage of your friend , and introduce mr. bingley to her . ''
`` impossible , mr. bennet , impossible , when i am not acquainted with him myself .
how can you be so teazing ? ''
`` i honour your circumspection .
a fortnight 's acquaintance is certainly very little .
one can not know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight .
but if we do not venture , somebody else will .
and after all , mrs. long and her nieces must stand their chance .
and therefore .
as she will think it an act of kindness .
if you decline the office , i will take it on myself . ''
the girls stared at their father .
mrs. bennet said only , `` nonsense , nonsense ! ''
`` what can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation ? ''
cried he .
`` do you consider the forms of introduction , and the stress that is laid on them , as nonsense ?
i can not quite agree with you there .
what say you , mary ?
for you are a young lady of deep reflection i know .
and read great books , and make extracts . ''
mary wished to say something very sensible , but knew not how .
`` while mary is adjusting her ideas , '' he continued , `` let us return to mr .
bingley . ''
`` i am sick of mr. bingley , '' cried his wife .
`` i am sorry to hear that .
but why did not you tell me so before ?
if i had known as much this morning , i certainly would not have called on him .
it is very unlucky .
but as i have actually paid the visit , we can not escape the acquaintance now . ''
the astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished .
that of mrs. bennet perhaps surpassing the rest .
though when the first tumult of joy was over .
she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the while .
`` how good it was in you , my dear mr. bennet !
but i knew i should persuade you at last .
i was sure you loved your girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance .
well , how pleased i am !
and it is such a good joke .
too , that you should have gone this morning , and never said a word about it till now . ''
`` now , kitty , you may cough as much as you chuse , '' said mr. bennet .
and , as he spoke , he left the room , fatigued with the raptures of his wife .
`` what an excellent father you have , girls , '' said she , when the door was shut .
`` i do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness .
or me either , for that matter .
at our time of life .
it is not so pleasant i can tell you , to be making new acquaintance every day .
but for your sakes , we would do any thing .
lydia .
my love .
though you are the youngest , i dare say mr. bingley will dance with you at the next ball . ''
`` oh ! ''
said lydia stoutly , `` i am not afraid .
for though i am the youngest , i 'm the tallest . ''
the rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would return mr. bennet 's visit .
and determining when they should ask him to dinner .
not all that mrs. bennet .
however .
with the assistance of her five daughters .
could ask on the subject was sufficient to draw from her husband any satisfactory description of mr. bingley .
they attacked him in various ways .
with barefaced questions , ingenious suppositions , and distant surmises .
but he eluded the skill of them all .
and they were at last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour lady lucas .
her report was highly favourable .
sir william had been delighted with him .
he was quite young .
wonderfully handsome .
extremely agreeable .
and to crown the whole , he meant to be at the next assembly with a large party .
nothing could be more delightful !
to be fond of dancing was a certain step towards falling in love .
and very lively hopes of mr. bingley 's heart were entertained .
`` if i can but see one of my daughters happily settled at netherfield .
'' said mrs. bennet to her husband .
`` and all the others equally well married , i shall have nothing to wish for . ''
in a few days mr. bingley returned mr. bennet 's visit .
and sat about ten minutes with him in his library .
he had entertained hopes of being admitted to a sight of the young ladies .
of whose beauty he had heard much .
but he saw only the father .
the ladies were somewhat more fortunate .
for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper window .
that he wore a blue coat and rode a black horse .
an invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched .
and already had mrs. bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her housekeeping .
when an answer arrived which deferred it all .
mr. bingley was obliged to be in town the following day .
and consequently unable to accept the honour of their invitation , & c. mrs. bennet was quite disconcerted .
she could not imagine what business he could have in town so soon after his arrival in hertfordshire .
and she began to fear that he might be always flying about from one place to another .
and never settled at netherfield as he ought to be .
lady lucas quieted her fears a little by starting the idea of his
being gone to london only to get a large party for the ball .
and a report soon followed that mr. bingley was to bring
twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly .
the girls grieved over such a number of ladies .
but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing .
that instead of twelve .
he had brought only six with him from london , his five sisters and a cousin .
and when the party entered the assembly room , it consisted of only five altogether .
mr. bingley , his two sisters , the husband of the eldest , and another young man .
mr. bingley was good looking and gentleman-like .
he had a pleasant countenance , and easy , unaffected manners .
his sisters were fine women , with an air of decided fashion .
his brother-in-law , mr. hurst , merely looked the gentleman .
but his friend mr. darcy soon drew the attention of the room by his fine .
tall person , handsome features , noble mien .
and the report which was in general circulation within five minutes after his entrance .
of his having ten thousand a year .
the gentlemen pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man .
the ladies declared he was much handsomer than mr. bingley .
and he was looked at with great admiration for about half the evening .
till his manners gave a disgust which turned the tide of his popularity .
for he was discovered to be proud , to be above his company , and above being pleased .
and not all his large estate in derbyshire could then save him from having a most forbidding .
disagreeable countenance , and being unworthy to be compared with his friend .
mr. bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal people in the room .
he was lively and unreserved .
danced every dance .
was angry that the ball closed so early , and talked of giving one himself at netherfield .
such amiable qualities must speak for themselves .
what a contrast between him and his friend !
mr. darcy danced only once with mrs. hurst and once with miss bingley .
declined being introduced to any other lady .
and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the room .
speaking occasionally to one of his own party .
his character was decided .
he was the proudest .
most disagreeable man in the world , and every body hoped that he would never come there again .
amongst the most violent against him was mrs. bennet .
whose dislike of his general behaviour .
was sharpened into particular resentment , by his having slighted one of her daughters .
elizabeth bennet had been obliged , by the scarcity of gentlemen , to sit down for two dances .
and during part of that time .
mr. darcy had been standing near enough for her to overhear a conversation between him and mr. bingley .
who came from the dance for a few minutes , to press his friend to join it .
`` come , darcy , '' said he , `` i must have you dance .
i hate to see you standing about by yourself in this stupid manner .
you had much better dance . ''
`` i certainly shall not .
you know how i detest it , unless i am particularly acquainted with my partner .
at such an assembly as this , it would be insupportable .
your sisters are engaged .
and there is not another woman in the room .
whom it would not be a punishment to me to stand up with . ''
`` i would not be so fastidious as you are , '' cried bingley , `` for a kingdom !
upon my honour .
i never met with so many pleasant girls in my life , as i have this evening .
and there are several of them you see uncommonly pretty . ''
`` you are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room .
'' said mr. darcy , looking at the eldest miss bennet .
`` oh !
she is the most beautiful creature i ever beheld !
but there is one of her sisters sitting down just behind you .
who is very pretty , and i dare say , very agreeable .
do let me ask my partner to introduce you . ''
`` which do you mean ? ''
and turning round .
he looked for a moment at elizabeth .
till catching her eye , he withdrew his own and coldly said , '' she is tolerable .
but not handsome enough to tempt me .
and i am in no humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted by other men .
you had better return to your partner and enjoy her smiles .
for you are wasting your time with me . ''
mr. bingley followed his advice .
mr. darcy walked off .
and elizabeth remained with no very cordial feelings towards him .
she told the story however with great spirit among her friends .
for she had a lively , playful disposition , which delighted in any thing ridiculous .
the evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family .
mrs. bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the netherfield party .
mr. bingley had danced with her twice , and she had been distinguished by his sisters .
jane was as much gratified by this , as her mother could be , though in a quieter way .
elizabeth felt jane's pleasure .
mary had heard herself mentioned to miss bingley as the most accomplished girl in the neighbourhood .
and catherine and lydia had been fortunate enough to be never without partners .
which was all that they had yet learnt to care for at a ball .
they returned therefore in good spirits to longbourn .
the village where they lived , and of which they were the principal inhabitants .
they found mr. bennet still up .
with a book he was regardless of time .
and on the present occasion he had a good deal of curiosity as
to the event of an evening which had raised such splendid expectations .
he had rather hoped that all his wife's views on the stranger would be disappointed .
but he soon found that he had a very different story to hear .
`` oh !
my dear mr. bennet .
'' as she entered the room , `` we have had a most delightful evening , a most excellent ball .
i wish you had been there .
jane was so admired , nothing could be like it .
every body said how well she looked .
and mr. bingley thought her quite beautiful , and danced with her twice .
only think of that my dear .
he actually danced with her twice .
and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second time .
first of all , he asked miss lucas .
i was so vexed to see him stand up with her .
but , however , he did not admire her at all : indeed , nobody can , you know .
and he seemed quite struck with jane as she was going down the dance .
so , he enquired who she was , and got introduced , and asked her for the two next .
then .
the two third he danced with miss king .
and the two fourth with maria lucas .
and the two fifth with jane again , and the two sixth with lizzy , and the boulanger .
. ``
`` if he had had any compassion for me .
'' cried her husband impatiently , '' he would not have danced half so much !
for god 's sake , say no more of his partners .
oh !
that he had sprained his ancle in the first dance ! ''
`` oh !
my dear , '' continued mrs. bennet , `` i am quite delighted with him .
he is so excessively handsome !
and his sisters are charming women .
i never in my life saw any thing more elegant than their dresses .
i dare say the lace upon mrs. hurst 's gown .
. ``
here she was interrupted again .
mr. bennet protested against any description of finery .
she was therefore obliged to seek another branch of the subject .
and related , with much bitterness of spirit and some exaggeration , the shocking rudeness of mr. darcy .
`` but i can assure you .
'' she added , `` that lizzy does not lose much by not suiting his fancy .
for he is a most disagreeable , horrid man , not at all worth pleasing .
so high and so conceited that there was no enduring him !
he walked here , and he walked there , fancying himself so very great !
not handsome enough to dance with !
i wish you had been there , my dear , to have given him one of your set downs .
i quite detest the man . ''
when jane and elizabeth were alone .
the former .
who had been cautious in her praise of mr. bingley before .
expressed to her sister how very much she admired him .
`` he is just what a young man ought to be .
'' said she , `` sensible , good humoured , lively .
and i never saw such happy manners ! .
so much ease , with such perfect good breeding ! ''
`` he is also handsome .
'' replied elizabeth , `` which a young man ought likewise to be , if he possibly can .
his character is thereby complete . ''
`` i was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time .
i did not expect such a compliment . ''
`` did not you ?
i did for you .
but that is one great difference between us .
compliments always take you by surprise , and me never .
what could be more natural than his asking you again ?
he could not help seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman in the room .
no thanks to his gallantry for that .
well , he certainly is very agreeable , and i give you leave to like him .
you have liked many a stupider person . ''
`` dear lizzy ! ''
`` oh !
you are a great deal too apt you know , to like people in general .
you never see a fault in any body .
all the world are good and agreeable in your eyes .
i never heard you speak ill of a human being in my life . ''
`` i would wish not to be hasty in censuring any one .
but i always speak what i think . ''
`` i know you do .
and it is that which makes the wonder .
with your good sense , to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of others !
affectation of candour is common enough.. one meets it every where .
but to be candid without ostentation or design .
to take the good of every body 's character and make it still better .
and say nothing of the bad .
belongs to you alone .
and so , you like this man 's sisters too , do you ?
their manners are not equal to his . ''
`` certainly not .
at first .
but they are very pleasing women when you converse with them .
miss bingley is to live with her brother and keep his house .
and i am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming neighbour in her . ''
elizabeth listened in silence , but was not convinced .
their behaviour at the assembly had not been calculated to please in general .
and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister .
and with a judgment too unassailed by any attention to herself , she was very little disposed to approve them .
they were in fact very fine ladies .
not deficient in good humour when they were pleased .
nor in the power of being agreeable where they chose it .
but proud and conceited .
they were rather handsome .
had been educated in one of the first private seminaries in town .
had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds .
were in the habit of spending more than they ought , and of associating with people of rank .
and were therefore in every respect entitled to think well of themselves , and meanly of others .
they were of a respectable family in the north of england .
a circumstance more deeply impressed on their memories than that their
brother 's fortune and their own had been acquired by trade .
mr. bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly an hundred thousand pounds from his father .
who had intended to purchase an estate .
but did not live to do it.. mr. bingley intended it likewise , and sometimes made choice of his county .
but as he was now provided with a good house and the liberty of a manor .
it was doubtful to many of those who best knew the easiness of his temper .
whether he might not spend the remainder of his days at netherfield , and leave the next generation to purchase .
his sisters were very anxious for his having an estate of his own .
but though he was now established only as a tenant .
miss bingley was by no means unwilling to preside at his table .
nor was mrs. hurst .
who had married a man of more fashion than fortune .
less disposed to consider his house as her home when it suited her .
mr. bingley had not been of age two years .
when he was tempted by an accidental recommendation to look at netherfield house .
he did look at it and into it for half an hour .
was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms .
satisfied with what the owner said in its praise , and took it immediately .
between him and darcy there was a very steady friendship .
in spite of a great opposition of character.. bingley was endeared to darcy by the easiness .
openness .
ductility of his temper .
though no disposition could offer a greater contrast to his own .
and though with his own he never appeared dissatisfied .
on the strength of darcy 's regard bingley had the firmest reliance , and of his judgment the highest opinion .
in understanding darcy was the superior .
bingley was by no means deficient , but darcy was clever .
he was at the same time haughty .
reserved , and fastidious , and his manners , though well bred , were not inviting .
in that respect his friend had greatly the advantage .
bingley was sure of being liked wherever he appeared , darcy was continually giving offence .
the manner in which they spoke of the meryton assembly was sufficiently characteristic .
bingley had never met with pleasanter people or prettier girls in his life .
every body had been most kind and attentive to him .
there had been no formality , no stiffness , he had soon felt acquainted with all the room .
and as to miss bennet , he could not conceive an angel more beautiful .
darcy .
on the contrary .
had seen a collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion .
for none of whom he had felt the smallest interest , and from none received either attention or pleasure .
miss bennet he acknowledged to be pretty , but she smiled too much .
mrs. hurst and her sister allowed it to be so .
but still they admired her and liked her .
and pronounced her to be a sweet girl , and one whom they should not object to know more of .
miss bennet was therefore established as a sweet girl .
and their brother felt authorised by such commendation to think of her as he chose .
within a short walk of longbourn lived a family with whom the bennets were particularly intimate .
sir william lucas had been formerly in trade in meryton .
where he had made a tolerable fortune and risen to the honour of knighthood by an address to the king .
during his mayoralty .
the distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly .
it had given him a disgust to his business and to his residence in a small market town .
and quitting them both .
he had removed with his family to a house about a mile from meryton .
denominated from that period lucas lodge .
where he could think with pleasure of his own importance .
and unshackled by business , occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world .
for though elated by his rank , it did not render him supercilious .
on the contrary , he was all attention to every body .
by nature inoffensive , friendly and obliging , his presentation at st. james 's had made him courteous .
lady lucas was a very good kind of woman .
not too clever to be a valuable neighbour to mrs. bennet.. they had several children .
the eldest of them , a sensible , intelligent young woman , about twenty-seven , was elizabeth 's intimate friend .
that the miss lucases and the miss bennets should meet to talk over a ball was absolutely necessary .
and the morning after the assembly brought the former to longbourn to hear and to communicate .
`` you began the evening well , charlotte , '' said mrs. bennet with civil self-command to miss lucas .
`` you were mr. bingley 's first choice . ''
`` yes.. but he seemed to like his second better . ''
`` oh ! .
you mean jane , i suppose .
because he danced with her twice .
to be sure that did seem as if he admired her .
indeed i rather believe he did .
i heard something about it .
but i hardly know what .
something about mr .
robinson . ''
`` perhaps you mean what i overheard between him and mr. robinson .
did not i mention it to you ?
mr. robinson 's asking him how he liked our meryton assemblies .
and whether he did not think there were a great many pretty women in the room .
and which he thought the prettiest ?
and his answering immediately to the last question .
oh !
the eldest miss bennet beyond a doubt , there can not be two opinions on that point . ''
`` upon my word ! .
well , that was very decided indeed .
that does seem as if .
.
but however , it may all come to nothing you know . ''
`` my overhearings were more to the purpose than yours , eliza , '' said charlotte .
`` mr. darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend , is he ? .
poor eliza ! .
to be only just tolerable . ''
`` i beg you would not put it into lizzy 's head to be vexed by his ill-treatment .
for he is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite a misfortune to be liked by him .
mrs. long told me last night that he sat close to
her for half an hour without once opening his lips . ''
`` are you quite sure , ma'am ? .
is not there a little mistake ? ''
said jane.. `` i certainly saw mr. darcy speaking to her . ''
`` aye .
because she asked him at last how he liked netherfield .
and he could not help answering her.. but she said he seemed very angry at being spoke to . ''
`` miss bingley told me .
'' said jane , `` that he never speaks much unless among his intimate acquaintance .
with them he is remarkably agreeable . ''
`` i do not believe a word of it , my dear .
if he had been so very agreeable he would have talked to mrs. long .
but i can guess how it was .
every body says that he is ate up with pride .
and i dare say he had heard somehow that mrs. long does not keep a carriage .
and had come to the ball in a hack chaise . ''
`` i do not mind his not talking to mrs. long .
'' said miss lucas , `` but i wish he had danced with eliza . ''
`` another time .
lizzy , '' said her mother , `` i would not dance with him , if i were you . ''
`` i believe , ma'am , i may safely promise you never to dance with him . ''
`` his pride .
'' said miss lucas .
`` does not offend me so much as pride often does , because there is an excuse for it .
one can not wonder that so very fine a young man .
with family , fortune , every thing in his favour , should think highly of himself .
if i may so express it , he has a right to be proud . ''
`` that is very true .
'' replied elizabeth , `` and i could easily forgive his pride , if he had not mortified mine . ''
`` pride .
'' observed mary .
who piqued herself upon the solidity of her reflections , `` is a very common failing i believe .
by all that i have ever read .
i am convinced that it is very common indeed .
that human nature is particularly prone to it .
and that there are very few of us who do not cherish
a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some quality or other .
real or imaginary .
vanity and pride are different things , though the words are often used synonimously .
a person may be proud without being vain .
pride relates more to our opinion of ourselves , vanity to what we would have others think of us . ''
`` if i were as rich as mr. darcy .
'' cried a young lucas who came with his sisters , `` i should not care how proud i was .
i would keep a pack of foxhounds , and drink a bottle of wine every day . ''
`` then you would drink a great deal more than you ought , '' said mrs. bennet .
`` and if i were to see you at it i should take away your bottle directly . ''
the boy protested that she should not .
she continued to declare that she would , and the argument ended only with the visit .
the ladies of longbourn soon waited on those of netherfield .
the visit was returned in due form .
miss bennet 's pleasing manners grew on the good will of mrs. hurst and miss bingley .
and though the mother was found to be intolerable and the younger sisters not worth speaking to .
a wish of being better acquainted with them , was expressed towards the two eldest .
by jane this attention was received with the greatest pleasure .
but elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment of every body .
hardly excepting even her sister , and could not like them .
though their kindness to jane .
such as it was .
had a value as arising in all probability from the influence of their brother 's admiration .
it was generally evident whenever they met , that he did admire her .
and to her it was equally evident that jane was yielding to the
preference which she had begun to entertain for him from the first .
and was in a way to be very much in love .
but she considered with pleasure that it was not likely to be discovered by the world in general .
since jane united with great strength of feeling .
a composure of temper and a uniform cheerfulness of manner .
which would guard her from the suspicions of the impertinent .
she mentioned this to her friend miss lucas .
`` it may perhaps be pleasant .
'' replied charlotte , `` to be able to impose on the public in such a case .
but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be so very guarded .
if a woman conceals her affection with the same skill from the object of it .
she may lose the opportunity of fixing him .
and it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the dark .
there is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every attachment .
that it is not safe to leave any to itself .
we can all begin freely .
a slight preference is natural enough .
but there are very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without encouragement .
in nine cases out of ten , a woman had better shew more affection than she feels .
bingley likes your sister undoubtedly .
but he may never do more than like her , if she does not help him on . ''
`` but she does help him on , as much as her nature will allow .
if i can perceive her regard for him .
he must be a simpleton indeed not to discover it too . ''
`` remember , eliza , that he does not know jane 's disposition as you do . ''
`` but if a woman is partial to a man .
and does not endeavour to conceal it , he must find it out . ''
`` perhaps he must , if he sees enough of her .
but though bingley and jane meet tolerably often , it is never for many hours together .
and as they always see each other in large mixed parties .
it is impossible that every moment should be employed in conversing together .
jane should therefore make the most of every half hour in which she can command his attention .
when she is secure of him .
there will be leisure for falling in love as much as she chuses . ''
`` your plan is a good one .
'' replied elizabeth , `` where nothing is in question but the desire of being well married .
and if i were determined to get a rich husband .
or any husband , i dare say i should adopt it .
but these are not jane 's feelings .
she is not acting by design .
as yet .
she can not even be certain of the degree of her own regard , nor of its reasonableness .
she has known him only a fortnight .
she danced four dances with him at meryton .
she saw him one morning at his own house , and has since dined in company with him four times .
this is not quite enough to make her understand his character . ''
`` not as you represent it .
had she merely dined with him , she might only have discovered whether he had a good appetite .
but you must remember that four evenings have been also spent together .
and four evenings may do a great deal . ''
`` yes .
these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they both like vingt-un better than commerce .
but with respect to any other leading characteristic , i do not imagine that much has been unfolded . ''
`` well , '' said charlotte , `` i wish jane success with all my heart .
and if she were married to him to-morrow .
i should think she had as good a chance of happiness .
as if she were to be studying his character for a twelvemonth .
happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance .
if the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other .
or ever so similar before-hand , it does not advance their felicity in the least .
they always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to have their share of vexation .
and it is better to know as little as possible of the defects
of the person with whom you are to pass your life . ''
`` you make me laugh , charlotte .
but it is not sound .
you know it is not sound , and that you would never act in this way yourself . ''
occupied in observing mr. bingley 's attentions to her sister .
elizabeth was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an
object of some interest in the eyes of his friend .
mr. darcy had at first scarcely allowed her to be pretty .
he had looked at her without admiration at the ball .
and when they next met , he looked at her only to criticise .
but no sooner had he made it clear to himself and his
friends that she had hardly a good feature in her face .
than he began to find it was rendered uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes .
to this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying .
though he had detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry in her form .
he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and pleasing .
and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those of the fashionable world .
he was caught by their easy playfulness .
of this she was perfectly unaware.. to her he was only the man who made himself agreeable no where .
and who had not thought her handsome enough to dance with .
he began to wish to know more of her .
and as a step towards conversing with her himself , attended to her conversation with others .
his doing so drew her notice .
it was at sir william lucas 's , where a large party were assembled .
`` what does mr. darcy mean .
'' said she to charlotte , `` by listening to my conversation with colonel forster ? ''
`` that is a question which mr. darcy only can answer . ''
`` but if he does it any more i shall certainly
let him know that i see what he is about .
he has a very satirical eye .
and if i do not begin by being impertinent myself , i shall soon grow afraid of him . ''
on his approaching them soon afterwards .
though without seeming to have any intention of speaking .
miss lucas defied her friend to mention such a subject to him .
which immediately provoking elizabeth to do it .
she turned to him and said .
`` did not you think .
mr. darcy .
that i expressed myself uncommonly well just now .
when i was teazing colonel forster to give us a ball at meryton ? ''
`` with great energy.. but it is a subject which always makes a lady energetic . ''
`` you are severe on us . ''
`` it will be her turn soon to be teazed , '' said miss lucas .
`` i am going to open the instrument , eliza , and you know what follows . ''
`` you are a very strange creature by way of a friend ! .
always wanting me to play and sing before any body and every body ! .
if my vanity had taken a musical turn .
you would have been invaluable .
but as it is .
i would really rather not sit down before those who must
be in the habit of hearing the very best performers . ''
on miss lucas 's persevering , however , she added , `` very well .
if it must be so , it must . ''
and gravely glancing at mr. darcy .
`` there is a fine old saying , which every body here is of course familiar with .
'keep your breath to cool your porridge , ' .
and i shall keep mine to swell my song . ''
her performance was pleasing , though by no means capital .
after a song or two .
and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that she would sing again .
she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her sister mary .
who having .
in consequence of being the only plain one in the family .
worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments , was always impatient for display .
mary had neither genius nor taste .
and though vanity had given her application .
it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceited manner .
which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than she had reached .
elizabeth .
easy and unaffected , had been listened to with much more pleasure , though not playing half so well .
and mary .
at the end of a long concerto .
was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by scotch and irish airs .
at the request of her younger sisters .
who with some of the lucases and two or three officers
joined eagerly in dancing at one end of the room .
mr. darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of passing the evening .
to the exclusion of all conversation .
and was too much engrossed by his own thoughts to perceive that sir william lucas was his neighbour .
till sir william thus began .
`` what a charming amusement for young people this is , mr. darcy ! .
there is nothing like dancing after all.. i consider it as one of the first refinements of polished societies . ''
`` certainly .
sir.. and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst
the less polished societies of the world.. every savage can dance . ''
sir william only smiled .
`` your friend performs delightfully . ''
he continued after a pause .
on seeing bingley join the group.. `` and i doubt not that you are an adept in the science yourself .
mr .
darcy . ''
`` you saw me dance at meryton , i believe , sir . ''
`` yes , indeed , and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight .
do you often dance at st .
james 's ? ''
`` never , sir . ''
`` do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place ? ''
`` it is a compliment which i never pay to any place if i can avoid it . ''
`` you have a house in town , i conclude ? ''
mr. darcy bowed .
`` i had once some thoughts of fixing in town myself .
for i am fond of superior society .
but i did not feel quite certain that the air of london would agree with lady lucas . ''
he paused in hopes of an answer .
but his companion was not disposed to make any .
and elizabeth at that instant moving towards them .
he was struck with the notion of doing a very gallant thing .
and called out to her , `` my dear miss eliza , why are not you dancing ? .
mr. darcy .
you must allow me to present this young lady to you
as a very desirable partner.. you can not refuse to dance .
i am sure , when so much beauty is before you . ''
and taking her hand .
he would have given it to mr. darcy .
who , though extremely surprised .
was not unwilling to receive it .
when she instantly drew back .
and said with some discomposure to sir william .
`` indeed .
sir .
i have not the least intention of dancing.. i entreat you not to suppose
that i moved this way in order to beg for a partner . ''
mr. darcy with grave propriety requested to be allowed the honour of her hand .
but in vain .
elizabeth was determined .
nor did sir william at all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion .
`` you excel so much in the dance .
miss eliza , that it is cruel to deny me the happiness of seeing you .
and though this gentleman dislikes the amusement in general .
he can have no objection , i am sure , to oblige us for one half hour . ''
`` mr. darcy is all politeness , '' said elizabeth , smiling .
`` he is indeed .
but considering the inducement , my dear miss eliza , we can not wonder at his complaisance .
for who would object to such a partner ? ''
elizabeth looked archly , and turned away .
her resistance had not injured her with the gentleman .
and he was thinking of her with some complacency .
when thus accosted by miss bingley , `` i can guess the subject of your reverie . ''
`` i should imagine not . ''
`` you are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings in this manner .
in such society .
and indeed i am quite of your opinion .
i was never more annoyed !
the insipidity and yet the noise .
the nothingness and yet the self-importance of all these people ! .
what would i give to hear your strictures on them ! ''
`` your conjecture is totally wrong , i assure you .
my mind was more agreeably engaged .
i have been meditating on the very great pleasure which a pair of
fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow . ''
miss bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face .
and desired he would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections .
mr. darcy replied with great intrepidity , `` miss elizabeth bennet . ''
`` miss elizabeth bennet ! ''
repeated miss bingley .
`` i am all astonishment .
how long has she been such a favourite ? .
and pray when am i to wish you joy ? ''
`` that is exactly the question which i expected you to ask .
a lady's imagination is very rapid .
it jumps from admiration to love , from love to matrimony in a moment .
i knew you would be wishing me joy . ''
`` nay , if you are so serious about it , i shall consider the matter as absolutely settled .
you will have a charming mother-in-law .
indeed , and of course she will be always at pemberley with you . ''
he listened to her with perfect indifference .
while she chose to entertain herself in this manner .
and as his composure convinced her that all was safe , her wit flowed long .
mr. bennet 's property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two thousand a year .
which , unfortunately for his daughters , was entailed in default of heirs male , on a distant relation .
and their mother's fortune .
though ample for her situation in life , could but ill supply the deficiency of his .
her father had been an attorney in meryton , and had left her four thousand pounds .
she had a sister married to a mr. philips .
who had been a clerk to their father .
and succeeded him in the business , and a brother settled in london in a respectable line of trade .
the village of longbourn was only one mile from meryton .
a most convenient distance for the young ladies .
who were usually tempted thither three or four times a week .
to pay their duty to their aunt and to a milliner 's shop just over the way .
the two youngest of the family , catherine and lydia , were particularly frequent in these attentions .
their minds were more vacant than their sisters ' .
and when nothing better offered .
a walk to meryton was necessary to amuse their morning hours and furnish conversation for the evening .
and however bare of news the country in general might be .
they always contrived to learn some from their aunt .
at present .
indeed .
they were well supplied both with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the neighbourhood .
it was to remain the whole winter , and meryton was the head quarters .
their visits to mrs. philips were now productive of the most interesting intelligence .
every day added something to their knowledge of the officers ' names and connections .
their lodgings were not long a secret , and at length they began to know the officers themselves .
mr. philips visited them all , and this opened to his nieces a source of felicity unknown before .
they could talk of nothing but officers .
and mr. bingley 's large fortune .
the mention of which gave animation to their mother .
was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals of an ensign .
after listening one morning to their effusions on this subject .
mr. bennet coolly observed .
`` from all that i can collect by your manner of talking .
you must be two of the silliest girls in the country .
i have suspected it some time , but i am now convinced . ''
catherine was disconcerted , and made no answer .
but lydia .
with perfect indifference .
continued to express her admiration of captain carter .
and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day .
as he was going the next morning to london .
`` i am astonished .
my dear .
'' said mrs. bennet , `` that you should be so ready to think your own children silly .
if i wished to think slightingly of any body 's children .
it should not be of my own however . ''
`` if my children are silly i must hope to be always sensible of it . ''
`` yes .
but as it happens , they are all of them very clever . ''
`` this is the only point , i flatter myself , on which we do not agree .
i had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular .
but i must so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly foolish . ''
`` my dear mr. bennet .
you must not expect such girls to have the sense of their father and mother.. when they get
to our age i dare say they will not think about officers any more than we do .
i remember the time when i liked a red coat myself very well .
and indeed so i do still at my heart .
and if a smart young colonel .
with five or six thousand a year .
should want one of my girls , i shall not say nay to him .
and i thought colonel forster looked very becoming the other night at sir william 's in his regimentals . ''
`` mama .
'' cried lydia .
`` my aunt says that colonel forster and captain carter do not go
so often to miss watson 's as they did when they first came .
she sees them now very often standing in clarke 's library . ''
mrs. bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with a note for miss bennet .
it came from netherfield , and the servant waited for an answer .
mrs. bennet 's eyes sparkled with pleasure .
and she was eagerly calling out .
while her daughter read , `` well , jane , who is it from ?
what is it about ?
what does he say ?
well , jane , make haste and tell us .
make haste , my love . ''
`` it is from miss bingley , '' said jane , and then read it aloud .
`` my dear friend .
`` if you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with louisa and me .
we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives .
for a whole day 's tête-à-tête between two women can never end without a quarrel .
come as soon as you can on the receipt of this .
my brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers .
yours ever , `` caroline bingley . ''
`` with the officers ! ''
cried lydia .
`` i wonder my aunt did not tell us of that . ''
`` dining out , '' said mrs. bennet , `` that is very unlucky . ''
`` can i have the carriage ? ''
said jane .
`` no , my dear , you had better go on horseback , because it seems likely to rain .
and then you must stay all night . ''
`` that would be a good scheme .
'' said elizabeth , `` if you were sure that they would not offer to send her home . ''
`` oh !
but the gentlemen will have mr. bingley 's chaise to go to meryton .
and the hursts have no horses to theirs . ''
`` i had much rather go in the coach . ''
`` but , my dear , your father can not spare the horses , i am sure .
they are wanted in the farm , mr. bennet , are not they ? ''
`` they are wanted in the farm much oftener than i can get them . ''
`` but if you have got them to-day .
'' said elizabeth , `` my mother 's purpose will be answered . ''
she did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses were engaged .
jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback .
and her mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad day .
her hopes were answered .
jane had not been gone long before it rained hard .
her sisters were uneasy for her , but her mother was delighted .
the rain continued the whole evening without intermission .
jane certainly could not come back .
`` this was a lucky idea of mine , indeed ! ''
said mrs. bennet , more than once , as if the credit of making it rain were all her own .
till the next morning , however , she was not aware of all the felicity of her contrivance .
breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from netherfield brought the following note for elizabeth : `` my dearest lizzy .
`` i find myself very unwell this morning .
which , i suppose , is to be imputed to my getting wet through yesterday .
my kind friends will not hear of my returning home till i am better .
they insist also on my seeing mr. jones .
therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having been to me .
and excepting a sore-throat and head-ache there is not much the matter with me .
`` yours .
& c. '' `` well .
my dear .
'' said mr. bennet .
when elizabeth had read the note aloud .
`` if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness .
if she should die .
it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of mr. bingley .
and under your orders . ''
`` oh !
i am not at all afraid of her dying .
people do not die of little trifling colds .
she will be taken good care of .
as long as she stays there , it is all very well .
i would go and see her , if i could have the carriage . ''
elizabeth .
feeling really anxious , was determined to go to her , though the carriage was not to be had .
and as she was no horse-woman , walking was her only alternative .
she declared her resolution .
`` how can you be so silly .
'' cried her mother , `` as to think of such a thing , in all this dirt !
you will not be fit to be seen when you get there . ''
`` i shall be very fit to see jane .
which is all i want . ''
`` is this a hint to me .
lizzy , '' said her father , `` to send for the horses ? ''
`` no , indeed .
i do not wish to avoid the walk .
the distance is nothing , when one has a motive .
only three miles .
i shall be back by dinner . ''
`` i admire the activity of your benevolence .
'' observed mary , `` but every impulse of feeling should be guided by reason .
and , in my opinion , exertion should always be in proportion to what is required . ''
`` we will go as far as meryton with you .
'' said catherine and lydia.. elizabeth accepted their company , and the three young ladies set off together .
`` if we make haste .
'' said lydia .
as they walked along , `` perhaps we may see something of captain carter before he goes . ''
in meryton they parted .
the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one of the officers ' wives .
and elizabeth continued her walk alone .
crossing field after field at a quick pace .
jumping over stiles and springing over puddles with impatient activity .
and finding herself at last within view of the house .
with weary ancles , dirty stockings , and a face glowing with the warmth of exercise .
she was shewn into the breakfast-parlour .
where all but jane were assembled .
and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise.. that
she should have walked three miles so early in the day .
in such dirty weather , and by herself , was almost incredible to mrs. hurst and miss bingley .
and elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt for it .
she was received , however , very politely by them .
and in their brother 's manners there was something better than politeness .
there was good humour and kindness.. mr. darcy said very little , and mr. hurst nothing at all .
the former was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion .
and doubt as to the occasion 's justifying her coming so far alone .
the latter was thinking only of his breakfast .
her enquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered .
miss bennet had slept ill .
and though up , was very feverish and not well enough to leave her room .
elizabeth was glad to be taken to her immediately .
and jane .
who had only been withheld by the fear of giving alarm or inconvenience .
from expressing in her note how much she longed for such a visit , was delighted at her entrance .
she was not equal .
however .
to much conversation .
and when miss bingley left them together .
could attempt little beside expressions of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness she was treated with .
elizabeth silently attended her .
when breakfast was over , they were joined by the sisters .
and elizabeth began to like them herself , when she saw how much affection and solicitude they shewed for jane .
the apothecary came .
and having examined his patient .
said .
as might be supposed .
that she had caught a violent cold , and that they must endeavour to get the better of it .
advised her to return to bed , and promised her some draughts .
the advice was followed readily , for the feverish symptoms increased , and her head ached acutely .
elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment , nor were the other ladies often absent .
the gentlemen being out , they had in fact nothing to do elsewhere .
when the clock struck three , elizabeth felt that she must go .
and very unwillingly said so .
miss bingley offered her the carriage .
and she only wanted a little pressing to accept it .
when jane testified such concern in parting with her .
that miss bingley was obliged to convert the offer of the
chaise into an invitation to remain at netherfield for the present .
elizabeth most thankfully consented .
and a servant was dispatched to longbourn to acquaint the family with her stay .
and bring back a supply of clothes .
at five o'clock the two ladies retired to dress , and at half past six elizabeth was summoned to dinner .
to the civil enquiries which then poured in .
and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of mr. bingley 's .
she could not make a very favourable answer .
jane was by no means better .
the sisters .
on hearing this .
repeated three or four times how much they were grieved .
how shocking it was to have a bad cold , and how excessively they disliked being ill themselves .
and then thought no more of the matter : and their indifference towards jane when not immediately before them .
restored elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her original dislike .
their brother , indeed , was the only one of the party whom she could regard with any complacency .
his anxiety for jane was evident .
and his attentions to herself most pleasing .
and they prevented her feeling herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the others .
she had very little notice from any but him .
miss bingley was engrossed by mr. darcy , her sister scarcely less so .
and as for mr. hurst .
by whom elizabeth sat .
he was an indolent man .
who lived only to eat .
drink .
and play at cards .
who when he found her prefer a plain dish to a ragout , had nothing to say to her .
when dinner was over .
she returned directly to jane .
and miss bingley began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room .
her manners were pronounced to be very bad indeed , a mixture of pride and impertinence .
she had no conversation , no style , no taste , no beauty .
mrs. hurst thought the same .
and added , `` she has nothing , in short , to recommend her , but being an excellent walker .
i shall never forget her appearance this morning .
she really looked almost wild . ''
`` she did indeed , louisa .
i could hardly keep my countenance .
very nonsensical to come at all !
why must she be scampering about the country , because her sister had a cold ?
her hair so untidy , so blowsy ! ''
`` yes , and her petticoat .
i hope you saw her petticoat , six inches deep in mud , i am absolutely certain .
and the gown which had been let down to hide it , not doing its office . ''
`` your picture may be very exact , louisa , '' said bingley .
`` but this was all lost upon me .
i thought miss elizabeth bennet looked remarkably well , when she came into the room this morning .
her dirty petticoat quite escaped my notice . ''
`` you observed it , mr. darcy , i am sure , '' said miss bingley .
`` and i am inclined to think that you would not
wish to see your sister make such an exhibition . ''
`` certainly not . ''
`` to walk three miles .
or four miles .
or five miles , or whatever it is , above her ancles in dirt , and alone , quite alone !
what could she mean by it ?
it seems to me to shew an abominable sort of conceited independence .
a most country town indifference to decorum . ''
`` it shews an affection for her sister that is very pleasing , '' said bingley .
`` i am afraid .
mr. darcy .
'' observed miss bingley .
in a half whisper , '' that this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes . ''
`` not at all , '' he replied .
`` they were brightened by the exercise . `` .
a short pause followed this speech , and mrs. hurst began again .
`` i have an excessive regard for jane bennet .
she is really a very sweet girl , and i wish with all my heart she were well settled .
but with such a father and mother .
and such low connections , i am afraid there is no chance of it . ''
`` i think i have heard you say , that their uncle is an attorney in meryton . ''
`` yes .
and they have another , who lives somewhere near cheapside . ''
`` that is capital , '' added her sister , and they both laughed heartily .
`` if they had uncles enough to fill all cheapside .
'' cried bingley , `` it would not make them one jot less agreeable . ''
`` but it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any consideration in the world .
'' replied darcy .
to this speech bingley made no answer .
but his sisters gave it their hearty assent .
and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of their dear friend 's vulgar relations .
with a renewal of tenderness .
however , they repaired to her room on leaving the dining-parlour , and sat with her till summoned to coffee .
she was still very poorly .
and elizabeth would not quit her at all .
till late in the evening .
when she had the comfort of seeing her asleep .
and when it appeared to her rather right than pleasant that she should go down stairs herself .
on entering the drawing-room she found the whole party at loo , and was immediately invited to join them .
but suspecting them to be playing high she declined it .
and making her sister the excuse .
said she would amuse herself for the short time she could stay below with a book .
mr. hurst looked at her with astonishment .
`` do you prefer reading to cards ? ''
said he .
`` that is rather singular . ''
`` miss eliza bennet , '' said miss bingley , `` despises cards .
she is a great reader and has no pleasure in anything else . ''
`` i deserve neither such praise nor such censure , '' cried elizabeth .
`` i am not a great reader , and i have pleasure in many things . ''
`` in nursing your sister i am sure you have pleasure , '' said bingley .
`` and i hope it will soon be increased by seeing her quite well . ''
elizabeth thanked him from her heart , and then walked towards a table where a few books were lying .
he immediately offered to fetch her others .
all that his library afforded .
`` and i wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own credit .
but i am an idle fellow .
and though i have not many , i have more than i ever look into . ''
elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those in the room .
`` i am astonished .
'' said miss bingley .
`` that my father should have left so small a collection
of books.. what a delightful library you have at pemberley .
mr .
darcy ! ''
`` it ought to be good .
'' he replied , `` it has been the work of many generations . ''
`` and then you have added so much to it yourself , you are always buying books . ''
`` i can not comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as these . ''
`` neglect !
i am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of that noble place .
charles , when you build your house , i wish it may be half as delightful as pemberley . ''
`` i wish it may . ''
`` but i would really advise you to make your purchase in that neighbourhood .
and take pemberley for a kind of model .
there is not a finer county in england than derbyshire . ''
`` with all my heart .
i will buy pemberley itself if darcy will sell it . ''
`` i am talking of possibilities , charles . ''
`` upon my word .
caroline , i should think it more possible to get pemberley by purchase than by imitation . ''
elizabeth was so much caught by what passed , as to leave her very little attention for her book .
and soon laying it wholly aside .
she drew near the card-table .
and stationed herself between mr. bingley and his eldest sister , to observe the game .
`` is miss darcy much grown since the spring ? ''
said miss bingley .
`` will she be as tall as i am ? ''
`` i think she will .
she is now about miss elizabeth bennet 's height , or rather taller . ''
`` how i long to see her again !
i never met with anybody who delighted me so much .
such a countenance , such manners !
and so extremely accomplished for her age !
her performance on the piano-forte is exquisite . ''
`` it is amazing to me .
'' said bingley .
`` how young ladies can have patience to be so very accomplished , as they all are . ''
`` all young ladies accomplished !
my dear charles , what do you mean ? ''
`` yes , all of them , i think .
they all paint tables , cover skreens and net purses .
i scarcely know any one who can not do all this .
and i am sure i never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time .
without being informed that she was very accomplished . ''
`` your list of the common extent of accomplishments , '' said darcy , `` has too much truth .
the word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no otherwise than by netting a purse .
or covering a skreen .
but i am very far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general .
i can not boast of knowing more than half a dozen .
in the whole range of my acquaintance , that are really accomplished . ''
`` nor i , i am sure , '' said miss bingley .
`` then .
'' observed elizabeth , `` you must comprehend a great deal in your idea of an accomplished woman . ''
`` yes .
i do comprehend a great deal in it . ''
`` oh !
certainly .
'' cried his faithful assistant .
`` no one can be really esteemed accomplished , who does not greatly surpass what is usually met with .
a woman must have a thorough knowledge of music .
singing , drawing , dancing , and the modern languages , to deserve the word .
and besides all this .
she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of walking .
the tone of her voice , her address and expressions , or the word will be but half deserved . ''
`` all this she must possess .
'' added darcy .
`` and to all this she must yet add something more substantial .
in the improvement of her mind by extensive reading . ''
`` i am no longer surprised at your knowing only six accomplished women .
i rather wonder now at your knowing any . ''
`` are you so severe upon your own sex , as to doubt the possibility of all this ? ''
`` i never saw such a woman .
i never saw such capacity .
and taste , and application , and elegance , as you describe , united . ''
mrs. hurst and miss bingley both cried out against the injustice of her implied doubt .
and were both protesting that they knew many women who answered this description .
when mr. hurst called them to order , with bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward .
as all conversation was thereby at an end , elizabeth soon afterwards left the room .
`` eliza bennet .
'' said miss bingley .
when the door was closed on her .
`` is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex .
by undervaluing their own .
and with many men , i dare say , it succeeds .
but , in my opinion , it is a paltry device , a very mean art . ''
`` undoubtedly .
'' replied darcy .
to whom this remark was chiefly addressed .
'' there is meanness in all the arts which ladies sometimes condescend to employ for captivation .
whatever bears affinity to cunning is despicable . ''
miss bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject .
elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse , and that she could not leave her .
bingley urged mr. jones 's being sent for immediately .
while his sisters .
convinced that no country advice could be of any service .
recommended an express to town for one of the most eminent physicians .
this , she would not hear of .
but she was not so unwilling to comply with their brother 's proposal .
and it was settled that mr. jones should be sent for early in the morning .
if miss bennet were not decidedly better .
bingley was quite uncomfortable .
his sisters declared that they were miserable .
they solaced their wretchedness .
however .
by duets after supper .
while he could find no better relief to his feelings than by giving his housekeeper
directions that every possible attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister .
elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister 's room .
and in the morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer
to the enquiries which she very early received from mr. bingley by a housemaid .
and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his sisters .
in spite of this amendment .
however .
she requested to have a note sent to longbourn .
desiring her mother to visit jane , and form her own judgment of her situation .
the note was immediately dispatched , and its contents as quickly complied with .
mrs. bennet , accompanied by her two youngest girls , reached netherfield soon after the family breakfast .
had she found jane in any apparent danger , mrs. bennet would have been very miserable .
but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was not alarming .
she had no wish of her recovering immediately , as her restoration to health would probably remove her from netherfield .
she would not listen therefore to her daughter 's proposal of being carried home .
neither did the apothecary , who arrived about the same time , think it at all advisable .
after sitting a little while with jane .
on miss bingley 's appearance and invitation , the mother and three daughters all attended her into the breakfast parlour .
bingley met them with hopes that mrs. bennet had not found miss bennet worse than she expected .
`` indeed i have , sir , '' was her answer .
`` she is a great deal too ill to be moved .
mr. jones says we must not think of moving her .
we must trespass a little longer on your kindness . ''
`` removed ! ''
cried bingley .
`` it must not be thought of .
my sister , i am sure , will not hear of her removal . ''
`` you may depend upon it .
madam .
'' said miss bingley .
with cold civility , '' that miss bennet shall receive every possible attention while she remains with us . ''
mrs. bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments .
`` i am sure .
'' she added .
`` if it was not for such good friends i do not know what would become of her .
for she is very ill indeed .
and suffers a vast deal .
though with the greatest patience in the world .
which is always the way with her .
for she has , without exception , the sweetest temper i ever met with .
i often tell my other girls they are nothing to her .
you have a sweet room here , mr. bingley , and a charming prospect over that gravel walk .
i do not know a place in the country that is equal to netherfield .
you will not think of quitting it in a hurry i hope .
though you have but a short lease . ''
`` whatever i do is done in a hurry , '' replied he .
`` and therefore if i should resolve to quit netherfield , i should probably be off in five minutes .
at present , however , i consider myself as quite fixed here . ''
`` that is exactly what i should have supposed of you , '' said elizabeth .
`` you begin to comprehend me , do you ? ''
cried he , turning towards her .
`` oh !
yes .
i understand you perfectly . ''
`` i wish i might take this for a compliment .
but to be so easily seen through i am afraid is pitiful . ''
`` that is as it happens .
it does not necessarily follow that a deep .
intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours . ''
`` lizzy .
'' cried her mother .
`` remember where you are .
and do not run on in the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home . ''
`` i did not know before , '' continued bingley immediately , `` that you were a studier of character .
it must be an amusing study . ''
`` yes .
but intricate characters are the most amusing .
they have at least that advantage . ''
`` the country , '' said darcy , `` can in general supply but few subjects for such a study .
in a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society . ''
`` but people themselves alter so much .
that there is something new to be observed in them for ever . ''
`` yes , indeed , '' cried mrs. bennet , offended by his manner of mentioning a country neighbourhood .
`` i assure you there is quite as much of that going on in the country as in town . ''
every body was surprised .
and darcy , after looking at her for a moment , turned silently away .
mrs. bennet , who fancied she had gained a complete victory over him , continued her triumph .
`` i can not see that london has any great advantage over the country for my part .
except the shops and public places .
the country is a vast deal pleasanter , is not it , mr .
bingley ? ''
`` when i am in the country , '' he replied , `` i never wish to leave it .
and when i am in town it is pretty much the same .
they have each their advantages , and i can be equally happy in either . ''
`` aye .
that is because you have the right disposition .
but that gentleman , '' looking at darcy , `` seemed to think the country was nothing at all . ''
`` indeed , mama , you are mistaken , '' said elizabeth , blushing for her mother .
`` you quite mistook mr. darcy .
he only meant that there were not such a variety of
people to be met with in the country as in town .
which you must acknowledge to be true . ''
`` certainly , my dear , nobody said there were .
but as to not meeting with many people in this neighbourhood , i believe there are few neighbourhoods larger .
i know we dine with four and twenty families . ''
nothing but concern for elizabeth could enable bingley to keep his countenance .
his sister was less delicate , and directed her eye towards mr. darcy with a very expressive smile .
elizabeth .
for the sake of saying something that might turn her mother 's thoughts .
now asked her if charlotte lucas had been at longbourn since her coming away .
`` yes , she called yesterday with her father .
what an agreeable man sir william is , mr. bingley .
is not he ?
so much the man of fashion !
so genteel and so easy ! .
he has always something to say to every body.. that is my idea of good breeding .
and those persons who fancy themselves very important and never open their mouths , quite mistake the matter . ''
`` did charlotte dine with you ? ''
`` no , she would go home .
i fancy she was wanted about the mince pies .
for my part , mr. bingley , i always keep servants that can do their own work .
my daughters are brought up differently .
but every body is to judge for themselves .
and the lucases are very good sort of girls , i assure you .
it is a pity they are not handsome !
not that i think charlotte so very plain .
but then she is our particular friend . ''
`` she seems a very pleasant young woman , '' said bingley .
`` oh !
dear , yes.. but you must own she is very plain .
lady lucas herself has often said so , and envied me jane 's beauty .
i do not like to boast of my own child , but to be sure , jane .
one does not often see any body better looking .
it is what every body says .
i do not trust my own partiality .
when she was only fifteen .
there was a gentleman at my brother gardiner 's in town .
so much in love with her .
that my sister-in-law was sure he would make her an offer before we came away .
but however he did not .
perhaps he thought her too young .
however , he wrote some verses on her , and very pretty they were . ''
`` and so ended his affection , '' said elizabeth impatiently .
`` there has been many a one , i fancy , overcome in the same way .
i wonder who first discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love ! ''
`` i have been used to consider poetry as the food of love , '' said darcy .
`` of a fine , stout , healthy love it may .
every thing nourishes what is strong already .
but if it be only a slight .
thin sort of inclination , i am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away . ''
darcy only smiled .
and the general pause which ensued made elizabeth tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again .
she longed to speak , but could think of nothing to say .
and after a short silence mrs. bennet began repeating her thanks to mr. bingley for his kindness to jane .
with an apology for troubling him also with lizzy .
mr. bingley was unaffectedly civil in his answer .
and forced his younger sister to be civil also , and say what the occasion required .
she performed her part indeed without much graciousness .
but mrs. bennet was satisfied , and soon afterwards ordered her carriage .
upon this signal , the youngest of her daughters put herself forward .
the two girls had been whispering to each other during the whole visit .
and the result of it was .
that the youngest should tax mr. bingley with having promised on his
first coming into the country to give a ball at netherfield .
lydia was a stout , well-grown girl of fifteen , with a fine complexion and good-humoured countenance .
a favourite with her mother , whose affection had brought her into public at an early age .
she had high animal spirits .
and a sort of natural self-consequence .
which the attentions of the officers .
to whom her uncle 's good dinners and her own easy manners recommended her , had increased into assurance .
she was very equal therefore to address mr. bingley on the subject of the ball .
and abruptly reminded him of his promise .
adding , that it would be the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it .
his answer to this sudden attack was delightful to their mother 's ear .
`` i am perfectly ready , i assure you , to keep my engagement .
and when your sister is recovered , you shall if you please name the very day of the ball .
but you would not wish to be dancing while she is ill. '' lydia declared herself satisfied .
`` oh !
yes .
it would be much better to wait till jane was well .
and by that time most likely captain carter would be at meryton again .
and when you have given your ball .
'' she added , `` i shall insist on their giving one also .
i shall tell colonel forster it will be quite a shame if he does not . ''
mrs. bennet and her daughters then departed .
and elizabeth returned instantly to jane .
leaving her own and her relations ' behaviour to the remarks of the two ladies and mr. darcy .
the latter of whom .
however .
could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of her .
in spite of all miss bingley 's witticisms on fine eyes .
the day passed much as the day before had done .
mrs. hurst and miss bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid .
who continued , though slowly , to mend .
and in the evening elizabeth joined their party in the drawing-room .
the loo table , however , did not appear .
mr. darcy was writing .
and miss bingley .
seated near him .
was watching the progress of his letter , and repeatedly calling off his attention by messages to his sister .
mr. hurst and mr. bingley were at piquet , and mrs. hurst was observing their game .
elizabeth took up some needlework , and was sufficiently amused in attending to what passed between darcy and his companion .
the perpetual commendations of the lady either on his hand-writing .
or on the evenness of his lines .
or on the length of his letter .
with the perfect unconcern with which her praises were received .
formed a curious dialogue , and was exactly in unison with her opinion of each .
`` how delighted miss darcy will be to receive such a letter ! ''
he made no answer .
`` you write uncommonly fast . ''
`` you are mistaken .
i write rather slowly . ''
`` how many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of the year !
letters of business too !
how odious i should think them ! ''
`` it is fortunate , then , that they fall to my lot instead of to yours . ''
`` pray tell your sister that i long to see her . ''
`` i have already told her so once , by your desire . ''
`` i am afraid you do not like your pen .
let me mend it for you .
i mend pens remarkably well . ''
`` thank you .
but i always mend my own . ''
`` how can you contrive to write so even ? ''
he was silent .
`` tell your sister i am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp .
and pray let her know that i am quite in raptures with her beautiful little design for a table .
and i think it infinitely superior to miss grantley 's . ''
`` will you give me leave to defer your raptures till i write again ? .
at present i have not room to do them justice . ''
`` oh !
it is of no consequence .
i shall see her in january .
but do you always write such charming long letters to her , mr .
darcy ? ''
`` they are generally long .
but whether always charming , it is not for me to determine . ''
`` it is a rule with me .
that a person who can write a long letter .
with ease .
can not write ill. '' `` that will not do for a compliment to darcy .
caroline , '' cried her brother .
`` because he does not write with ease .
he studies too much for words of four syllables.. do not you , darcy ? ''
`` my style of writing is very different from yours . ''
`` oh ! ''
cried miss bingley , `` charles writes in the most careless way imaginable .
he leaves out half his words , and blots the rest . ''
`` my ideas flow so rapidly that i have not time to express them .
by which means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents . ''
`` your humility , mr. bingley , '' said elizabeth , `` must disarm reproof . ''
`` nothing is more deceitful , '' said darcy , `` than the appearance of humility .
it is often only carelessness of opinion , and sometimes an indirect boast . ''
`` and which of the two do you call my little recent piece of modesty ? ''
`` the indirect boast.. for you are really proud of your defects in writing .
because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution .
which if not estimable , you think at least highly interesting .
the power of doing any thing with quickness is always much prized by the possessor .
and often without any attention to the imperfection of the performance .
when you told mrs. bennet this morning that if you ever
resolved on quitting netherfield you should be gone in five minutes .
you meant it to be a sort of panegyric , of compliment to yourself .
and yet what is there so very laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business undone .
and can be of no real advantage to yourself or any one else ? ''
`` nay .
'' cried bingley .
`` this is too much , to remember at night all the foolish things that were said in the morning .
and yet .
upon my honour .
i believed what i said of myself to be true , and i believe it at this moment .
at least .
therefore , i did not assume the character of needless precipitance merely to shew off before the ladies . ''
`` i dare say you believed it .
but i am by no means convinced that you would be gone with such celerity .
your conduct would be quite as dependant on chance as that of any man i know .
and if .
as you were mounting your horse .
a friend were to say .
'bingley .
you had better stay till next week , ' you would probably do it , you would probably not go .
and , at another word , might stay a month . ''
`` you have only proved by this .
'' cried elizabeth , `` that mr. bingley did not do justice to his own disposition .
you have shewn him off now much more than he did himself . ''
`` i am exceedingly gratified .
'' said bingley .
`` by your converting what my friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper .
but i am afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means intend .
for he would certainly think the better of me .
if under such a circumstance i were to give a flat denial .
and ride off as fast as i could . ''
`` would mr. darcy then consider the rashness of your original intention
as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it ? ''
`` upon my word i can not exactly explain the matter , darcy must speak for himself . ''
`` you expect me to account for opinions which you chuse to call mine .
but which i have never acknowledged .
allowing the case .
however .
to stand according to your representation .
you must remember .
miss bennet .
that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house .
and the delay of his plan .
has merely desired it , asked it without offering one argument in favour of its propriety . ''
`` to yield readily .
easily .
to the persuasion of a friend is no merit with you . ''
`` to yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of either . ''
`` you appear to me , mr. darcy , to allow nothing for the influence of friendship and affection .
a regard for the requester would often make one readily yield to a request .
without waiting for arguments to reason one into it .
i am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have supposed about mr. bingley .
we may as well wait .
perhaps , till the circumstance occurs , before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour thereupon .
but in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend .
where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no very great moment .
should you think ill of that person for complying with the desire .
without waiting to be argued into it ? ''
`` will it not be advisable .
before we proceed on this subject .
to arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to appertain to this request .
as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting between the parties ? ''
`` by all means , '' cried bingley .
`` let us hear all the particulars , not forgetting their comparative height and size .
for that will have more weight in the argument , miss bennet , than you may be aware of .
i assure you that if darcy were not such a great tall fellow .
in comparison with myself , i should not pay him half so much deference .
i declare i do not know a more aweful object than darcy .
on particular occasions , and in particular places .
at his own house especially , and of a sunday evening when he has nothing to do . ''
mr. darcy smiled .
but elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was rather offended .
and therefore checked her laugh .
miss bingley warmly resented the indignity he had received , in an expostulation with her brother for talking such nonsense .
`` i see your design .
bingley , '' said his friend.. `` you dislike an argument , and want to silence this . ''
`` perhaps i do .
arguments are too much like disputes .
if you and miss bennet will defer yours till i am out of the room .
i shall be very thankful .
and then you may say whatever you like of me . ''
`` what you ask , '' said elizabeth , `` is no sacrifice on my side .
and mr. darcy had much better finish his letter . ''
mr. darcy took her advice , and did finish his letter .
when that business was over , he applied to miss bingley and elizabeth for the indulgence of some music .
miss bingley moved with alacrity to the piano-forte .
and after a polite request that elizabeth would lead the way .
which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived , she seated herself .
mrs. hurst sang with her sister .
and while they were thus employed elizabeth could not help observing as
she turned over some music books that lay on the instrument .
how frequently mr. darcy 's eyes were fixed on her .
she hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of admiration to so great a man .
and yet that he should look at her because he disliked her , was still more strange .
she could only imagine however at last .
that she drew his notice because there was a something about her more wrong and reprehensible .
according to his ideas of right , than in any other person present .
the supposition did not pain her .
she liked him too little to care for his approbation .
after playing some italian songs , miss bingley varied the charm by a lively scotch air .
and soon afterwards mr. darcy , drawing near elizabeth , said to her .
`` do not you feel a great inclination .
miss bennet , to seize such an opportunity of dancing a reel ? ''
she smiled , but made no answer .
he repeated the question , with some surprise at her silence .
`` oh ! ''
said she , `` i heard you before .
but i could not immediately determine what to say in reply .
you wanted me .
i know , to say 'yes , ' that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste .
but i always delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes , and cheating a person of their premeditated contempt .
i have therefore made up my mind to tell you .
that i do not want to dance a reel at all .
and now despise me if you dare . ''
`` indeed i do not dare . ''
elizabeth , having rather expected to affront him , was amazed at his gallantry .
but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her
manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody .
and darcy had never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her .
he really believed .
that were it not for the inferiority of her connections , he should be in some danger .
miss bingley saw , or suspected enough to be jealous .
and her great anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend jane .
received some assistance from her desire of getting rid of elizabeth .
she often tried to provoke darcy into disliking her guest .
by talking of their supposed marriage , and planning his happiness in such an alliance .
`` i hope .
'' said she .
as they were walking together in the shrubbery the next day .
`` you will give your mother-in-law a few hints .
when this desirable event takes place , as to the advantage of holding her tongue .
and if you can compass it .
do cure the younger girls of running after the officers.. and .
if i may mention so delicate a subject .
endeavour to check that little something , bordering on conceit and impertinence , which your lady possesses . ''
`` have you any thing else to propose for my domestic felicity ? ''
`` oh !
yes.. do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt philips be placed in the gallery at pemberley .
put them next to your great uncle the judge .
they are in the same profession , you know .
only in different lines .
as for your elizabeth 's picture .
you must not attempt to have it taken , for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes ? ''
`` it would not be easy .
indeed .
to catch their expression .
but their colour and shape , and the eye-lashes , so remarkably fine , might be copied . ''
at that moment they were met from another walk , by mrs. hurst and elizabeth herself .
`` i did not know that you intended to walk .
'' said miss bingley , in some confusion , lest they had been overheard .
`` you used us abominably ill .
'' answered mrs. hurst , `` in running away without telling us that you were coming out . ''
then taking the disengaged arm of mr. darcy , she left elizabeth to walk by herself .
the path just admitted three .
mr. darcy felt their rudeness and immediately said , .
`` this walk is not wide enough for our party .
we had better go into the avenue . ''
but elizabeth .
who had not the least inclination to remain with them , laughingly answered , `` no , no .
stay where you are.. you are charmingly group 'd , and appear to uncommon advantage .
the picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a fourth .
good bye . ''
she then ran gaily off .
rejoicing as she rambled about , in the hope of being at home again in a day or two .
jane was already so much recovered as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening .
when the ladies removed after dinner .
elizabeth ran up to her sister , and seeing her well guarded from cold , attended her into the drawing-room .
where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of pleasure .
and elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared .
their powers of conversation were considerable .
they could describe an entertainment with accuracy .
relate an anecdote with humour , and laugh at their acquaintance with spirit .
but when the gentlemen entered , jane was no longer the first object .
miss bingley 's eyes were instantly turned towards darcy .
and she had something to say to him before he had advanced many steps .
he addressed himself directly to miss bennet , with a polite congratulation .
mr. hurst also made her a slight bow , and said he was `` very glad . ''
but diffuseness and warmth remained for bingley 's salutation .
he was full of joy and attention .
the first half hour was spent in piling up the fire .
lest she should suffer from the change of room .
and she removed at his desire to the other side of the fire-place .
that she might be farther from the door .
he then sat down by her , and talked scarcely to any one else .
elizabeth , at work in the opposite corner , saw it all with great delight .
when tea was over , mr. hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the card-table .
but in vain .
she had obtained private intelligence that mr. darcy did not wish for cards .
and mr. hurst soon found even his open petition rejected .
she assured him that no one intended to play .
and the silence of the whole party on the subject , seemed to justify her .
mr. hurst had therefore nothing to do .
but to stretch himself on one of the sophas and go to sleep .
darcy took up a book .
miss bingley did the same .
and mrs. hurst .
principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and rings .
joined now and then in her brother 's conversation with miss bennet .
miss bingley 's attention was quite as much engaged in watching mr. darcy 's progress through his book .
as in reading her own .
and she was perpetually either making some inquiry , or looking at his page .
she could not win him , however , to any conversation .
he merely answered her question , and read on .
at length .
quite exhausted by the attempt to be amused with her own book .
which she had only chosen because it was the second volume of his .
she gave a great yawn and said , `` how pleasant it is to spend an evening in this way !
i declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading !
how much sooner one tires of any thing than of a book ! .
when i have a house of my own .
i shall be miserable if i have not an excellent library . ''
no one made any reply .
she then yawned again .
threw aside her book , and cast her eyes round the room in quest of some amusement .
when hearing her brother mentioning a ball to miss bennet .
she turned suddenly towards him and said .
`` by the bye , charles , are you really serious in meditating a dance at netherfield ? .
i would advise you , before you determine on it , to consult the wishes of the present party .
i am much mistaken if there are not some among us to
whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a pleasure . ''
`` if you mean darcy .
'' cried her brother , `` he may go to bed , if he chuses , before it begins .
but as for the ball , it is quite a settled thing .
and as soon as nicholls has made white soup enough i shall send round my cards . ''
`` i should like balls infinitely better .
'' she replied , `` if they were carried on in a different manner .
but there is something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting .
it would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of dancing made the order of the day . ''
`` much more rational .
my dear caroline , i dare say , but it would not be near so much like a ball . ''
miss bingley made no answer .
and soon afterwards got up and walked about the room .
her figure was elegant .
and she walked well.. but darcy , at whom it was all aimed , was still inflexibly studious .
in the desperation of her feelings she resolved on one effort more .
and .
turning to elizabeth .
said .
`` miss eliza bennet .
let me persuade you to follow my example .
and take a turn about the room.. i assure you it
is very refreshing after sitting so long in one attitude . ''
elizabeth was surprised , but agreed to it immediately .
miss bingley succeeded no less in the real object of her civility .
mr. darcy looked up .
he was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as elizabeth herself could be .
and unconsciously closed his book .
he was directly invited to join their party .
but he declined it .
observing .
that he could imagine but two motives for their chusing to walk up and down the room together .
with either of which motives his joining them would interfere .
`` what could he mean ?
she was dying to know what could be his meaning '' .
and asked elizabeth whether she could at all understand him ?
`` not at all , '' was her answer .
`` but depend upon it .
he means to be severe on us .
and our surest way of disappointing him , will be to ask nothing about it . ''
miss bingley .
however .
was incapable of disappointing mr. darcy in any thing .
and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of his two motives .
`` i have not the smallest objection to explaining them .
'' said he , as soon as she allowed him to speak .
`` you either chuse this method of passing the evening because you
are in each other 's confidence and have secret affairs to discuss .
or because you are conscious that your figures appear to the greatest advantage in walking.. if the first .
i should be completely in your way.. and if the second .
i can admire you much better as i sit by the fire . ''
`` oh !
shocking ! ''
cried miss bingley .
`` i never heard any thing so abominable .
how shall we punish him for such a speech ? ''
`` nothing so easy , if you have but the inclination , '' said elizabeth .
`` we can all plague and punish one another .
teaze him .
laugh at him.. intimate as you are , you must know how it is to be done . ''
`` but upon my honour i do not .
i do assure you that my intimacy has not yet taught me that .
teaze calmness of temper and presence of mind !
no , no .
i feel he may defy us there .
and as to laughter .
we will not expose ourselves , if you please , by attempting to laugh without a subject .
mr. darcy may hug himself . ''
`` mr. darcy is not to be laughed at ! ''
cried elizabeth .
`` that is an uncommon advantage .
and uncommon i hope it will continue .
for it would be a great loss to me to have many such acquaintance .
i dearly love a laugh . ''
`` miss bingley , '' said he , `` has given me credit for more than can be .
the wisest and the best of men .
nay .
the wisest and best of their actions .
may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a joke . ''
`` certainly , '' replied elizabeth .
`` there are such people , but i hope i am not one of them .
i hope i never ridicule what is wise or good .
follies and nonsense .
whims and inconsistencies do divert me .
i own .
and i laugh at them whenever i can.. but these .
i suppose , are precisely what you are without . ''
`` perhaps that is not possible for any one .
but it has been the study of my life to avoid
those weaknesses which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule . ''
`` such as vanity and pride . ''
`` yes , vanity is a weakness indeed .
but pride .
where there is a real superiority of mind , pride will be always under good regulation . ''
elizabeth turned away to hide a smile .
`` your examination of mr. darcy is over .
i presume , '' said miss bingley.. `` and pray what is the result ? ''
`` i am perfectly convinced by it that mr. darcy has no defect .
he owns it himself without disguise . ''
`` no '' .
said darcy , `` i have made no such pretension .
i have faults enough , but they are not , i hope , of understanding .
my temper i dare not vouch for.. it is i believe too little yielding .
certainly too little for the convenience of the world .
i can not forget the follies and vices of others so soon as i ought .
nor their offences against myself .
my feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move them .
my temper would perhaps be called resentful.. my good opinion once lost is lost for ever . ''
`` that is a failing indeed ! `` .
cried elizabeth .
`` implacable resentment is a shade in a character .
but you have chosen your fault well.. i really can not laugh at it .
you are safe from me . ''
`` there is .
i believe .
in every disposition a tendency to some particular evil .
a natural defect , which not even the best education can overcome . ''
`` and your defect is a propensity to hate every body . ''
`` and yours , '' he replied with a smile , `` is wilfully to misunderstand them . ''
`` do let us have a little music , '' .
cried miss bingley .
tired of a conversation in which she had no share.. `` louisa , you will not mind my waking mr .
hurst . ''
her sister made not the smallest objection .
and the piano-forte was opened , and darcy , after a few moments recollection , was not sorry for it .
he began to feel the danger of paying elizabeth too much attention .
in consequence of an agreement between the sisters .
elizabeth wrote the next morning to her mother .
to beg that the carriage might be sent for them in the course of the day .
but mrs. bennet .
who had calculated on her daughters remaining at netherfield till the following tuesday .
which would exactly finish jane 's week , could not bring herself to receive them with pleasure before .
her answer .
therefore .
was not propitious , at least not to elizabeth 's wishes , for she was impatient to get home .
mrs. bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage before tuesday .
and in her postscript it was added .
that if mr. bingley and his sister pressed them to stay longer .
she could spare them very well.. against staying longer , however , elizabeth was positively resolved .
nor did she much expect it would be asked .
and fearful .
on the contrary .
as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long .
she urged jane to borrow mr. bingley 's carriage immediately .
and at length it was settled that their original design of leaving netherfield that morning should be mentioned .
and the request made .
the communication excited many professions of concern .
and enough was said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on jane .
and till the morrow , their going was deferred .
miss bingley was then sorry that she had proposed the delay .
for her jealousy and dislike of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other .
the master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so soon .
and repeatedly tried to persuade miss bennet that it would not be safe for her .
that she was not enough recovered .
but jane was firm where she felt herself to be right .
to mr. darcy it was welcome intelligence .
elizabeth had been at netherfield long enough .
she attracted him more than he liked .
and miss bingley was uncivil to her , and more teazing than usual to himself .
he wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should now escape him .
nothing that could elevate her with the hope of influencing his felicity .
sensible that if such an idea had been suggested .
his behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing it .
steady to his purpose .
he scarcely spoke ten words to her through the whole of saturday .
and though they were at one time left by themselves for half an hour .
he adhered most conscientiously to his book , and would not even look at her .
on sunday , after morning service , the separation , so agreeable to almost all , took place .
miss bingley 's civility to elizabeth increased at last very rapidly , as well as her affection for jane .
and when they parted .
after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to see her either at longbourn or netherfield .
and embracing her most tenderly .
she even shook hands with the former.. elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the liveliest spirits .
they were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother .
mrs. bennet wondered at their coming .
and thought them very wrong to give so much trouble .
and was sure jane would have caught cold again.. but their father .
though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure , was really glad to see them .
he had felt their importance in the family circle .
the evening conversation .
when they were all assembled .
had lost much of its animation , and almost all its sense , by the absence of jane and elizabeth .
they found mary , as usual , deep in the study of thorough bass and human nature .
and had some new extracts to admire , and some new observations of thread-bare morality to listen to .
catherine and lydia had information for them of a different sort .
much had been done , and much had been said in the regiment since the preceding wednesday .
several of the officers had dined lately with their uncle .
a private had been flogged , and it had actually been hinted that colonel forster was going to be married .
`` i hope .
my dear .
'' said mr. bennet to his wife .
as they were at breakfast the next morning .
`` that you have ordered a good dinner to-day .
because i have reason to expect an addition to our family party . ''
`` who do you mean , my dear ?
i know of nobody that is coming i am sure .
unless charlotte lucas should happen to call in , and i hope my dinners are good enough for her .
i do not believe she often sees such at home . ''
`` the person of whom i speak , is a gentleman and a stranger . ''
mrs. bennet 's eyes sparkled.. `` a gentleman and a stranger !
it is mr. bingley i am sure .
why jane .
you never dropt a word of this .
you sly thing !
well , i am sure i shall be extremely glad to see mr. bingley.. but .
good lord !
how unlucky !
there is not a bit of fish to be got to-day .
lydia , my love , ring the bell .
i must speak to hill , this moment . ''
`` it is not mr. bingley , '' said her husband .
`` it is a person whom i never saw in the whole course of my life . ''
this roused a general astonishment .
and he had the pleasure of being eagerly questioned by his wife and five daughters at once .
after amusing himself some time with their curiosity , he thus explained .
`` about a month ago i received this letter .
and about a fortnight ago i answered it .
for i thought it a case of some delicacy , and requiring early attention .
it is from my cousin .
mr. collins .
who .
when i am dead , may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases . ''
`` oh !
my dear , '' cried his wife , `` i can not bear to hear that mentioned .
pray do not talk of that odious man .
i do think it is the hardest thing in the world .
that your estate should be entailed away from your own children .
and i am sure if i had been you .
i should have tried long ago to do something or other about it . ''
jane and elizabeth attempted to explain to her the nature of an entail .
they had often attempted it before .
but it was a subject on which mrs. bennet was beyond the reach of reason .
and she continued to rail bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of five daughters .
in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about .
`` it certainly is a most iniquitous affair .
'' said mr. bennet , `` and nothing can clear mr. collins from the guilt of inheriting longbourn .
but if you will listen to his letter .
you may perhaps be a little softened by his manner of expressing himself . ''
`` no , that i am sure i shall not .
and i think it was very impertinent of him to write to you at all , and very hypocritical .
i hate such false friends .
why could not he keep on quarrelling with you , as his father did before him ? ''
`` why .
indeed , he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that head , as you will hear . ''
hunsford , near westerham , kent , 15th october .
dear sir .
the disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured father .
always gave me much uneasiness .
and since i have had the misfortune to lose him , i have frequently wished to heal the breach .
but for some time i was kept back by my own doubts .
fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be on good terms with any one .
with whom it had always pleased him to be at variance.. `` there , mrs .
bennet . `` .
my mind however is now made up on the subject .
for having received ordination at easter .
i have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the right honourable lady catherine de bourgh .
widow of sir lewis de bourgh .
whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish .
where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her ladyship .
and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are instituted by the church of england .
as a clergyman .
moreover .
i feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing
of peace in all families within the reach of my influence .
and on these grounds i flatter myself that my present overtures of good-will are highly commendable .
and that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of longbourn estate .
will be kindly overlooked on your side , and not lead you to reject the offered olive branch .
i can not be otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring your amiable daughters .
and beg leave to apologise for it .
as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible amends , .
but of this hereafter .
if you should have no objection to receive me into your house .
i propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family .
monday , november 18th .
by four o'clock .
and shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the saturday se'night following .
which i can do without any inconvenience .
as lady catherine is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a sunday .
provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day .
i remain .
dear sir , with respectful compliments to your lady and daughters , your well-wisher and friend , william collins . ''
`` at four o'clock .
therefore , we may expect this peace-making gentleman , '' said mr. bennet , as he folded up the letter .
`` he seems to be a most conscientious and polite young man , upon my word .
and i doubt not will prove a valuable acquaintance .
especially if lady catherine should be so indulgent as to let him come to us again . ''
`` there is some sense in what he says about the girls however .
and if he is disposed to make them any amends .
i shall not be the person to discourage him . ''
`` though it is difficult .
'' said jane .
`` to guess in what way he can mean to make us the atonement he thinks our due .
the wish is certainly to his credit . ''
elizabeth was chiefly struck with his extraordinary deference for lady catherine .
and his kind intention of christening , marrying , and burying his parishioners whenever it were required .
`` he must be an oddity , i think , '' said she .
`` i can not make him out.. there is something very pompous in his style..
and what can he mean by apologizing for being next in the entail ? .
we can not suppose he would help it .
if he could.. can he be a sensible man , sir ? ''
`` no , my dear .
i think not .
i have great hopes of finding him quite the reverse .
there is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his letter , which promises well .
i am impatient to see him . ''
`` in point of composition , '' said mary , `` his letter does not seem defective .
the idea of the olive branch perhaps is not wholly new , yet i think it is well expressed . ''
to catherine and lydia , neither the letter nor its writer were in any degree interesting .
it was next to impossible that their cousin should come in a scarlet coat .
and it was now some weeks since they had received pleasure
from the society of a man in any other colour .
as for their mother .
mr. collins 's letter had done away much of her ill-will .
and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure , which astonished her husband and daughters .
mr. collins was punctual to his time , and was received with great politeness by the whole family .
mr. bennet indeed said little .
but the ladies were ready enough to talk .
and mr. collins seemed neither in need of encouragement , nor inclined to be silent himself .
he was a tall , heavy looking young man of five and twenty .
his air was grave and stately , and his manners were very formal .
he had not been long seated before he complimented mrs. bennet on having so fine a family of daughters .
said he had heard much of their beauty .
but that , in this instance , fame had fallen short of the truth .
and added , that he did not doubt her seeing them all in due time well disposed of in marriage .
this gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers .
but mrs. bennet .
who quarrelled with no compliments .
answered most readily , `` you are very kind , sir , i am sure .
and i wish with all my heart it may prove so .
for else they will be destitute enough .
things are settled so oddly . ''
`` you allude perhaps to the entail of this estate . ''
`` ah !
sir , i do indeed .
it is a grievous affair to my poor girls , you must confess .
not that i mean to find fault with you .
for such things i know are all chance in this world .
there is no knowing how estates will go when once they come to be entailed . ''
`` i am very sensible , madam , of the hardship to my fair cousins , .
and could say much on the subject , but that i am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate .
but i can assure the young ladies that i come prepared to admire them .
at present i will not say more , but perhaps when we are better acquainted .
. ``
he was interrupted by a summons to dinner .
and the girls smiled on each other .
they were not the only objects of mr. collins 's admiration .
the hall , the dining-room , and all its furniture were examined and praised .
and his commendation of every thing would have touched mrs. bennet's heart .
but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his own future property .
the dinner too in its turn was highly admired .
and he begged to know to which of his fair cousins , the excellence of its cookery was owing .
but here he was set right by mrs. bennet .
who assured him with some asperity that they were very well able to keep a good cook .
and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen .
he begged pardon for having displeased her .
in a softened tone she declared herself not at all offended .
but he continued to apologise for about a quarter of an hour .
during dinner , mr. bennet scarcely spoke at all .
but when the servants were withdrawn .
he thought it time to have some conversation with his guest .
and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to shine .
by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness .
lady catherine de bourgh 's attention to his wishes , and consideration for his comfort , appeared very remarkable .
mr. bennet could not have chosen better .
mr. collins was eloquent in her praise .
the subject elevated him to more than usual solemnity of manner .
and with a most important aspect he protested that he had never
in his life witnessed such behaviour in a person of rank .
such affability and condescension , as he had himself experienced from lady catherine .
she had been graciously pleased to approve of both the discourses .
which he had already had the honour of preaching before her .
she had also asked him twice to dine at rosings .
and had sent for him only the saturday before , to make up her pool of quadrille in the evening .
lady catherine was reckoned proud by many people he knew .
but he had never seen any thing but affability in her .
she had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman .
she made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the neighbourhood .
nor to his leaving his parish occasionally for a week or two , to visit his relations .
she had even condescended to advise him to marry as soon as he could , provided he chose with discretion .
and had once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage .
where she had perfectly approved all the alterations he had been making .
and had even vouchsafed to suggest some herself , .
some shelves in the closets up stairs .
`` that is all very proper and civil .
i am sure , '' said mrs. bennet , `` and i dare say she is a very agreeable woman .
it is a pity that great ladies in general are not more like her .
does she live near you , sir ? ''
`` the garden in which stands my humble abode .
is separated only by a lane from rosings park , her ladyship 's residence . ''
`` i think you said she was a widow , sir ?
has she any family ? ''
`` she has one only daughter , the heiress of rosings , and of very extensive property . ''
`` ah ! ''
cried mrs. bennet , shaking her head , `` then she is better off than many girls .
and what sort of young lady is she ?
is she handsome ? ''
`` she is a most charming young lady indeed .
lady catherine herself says that in point of true beauty .
miss de bourgh is far superior to the handsomest of her sex .
because there is that in her features which marks the young woman of distinguished birth .
she is unfortunately of a sickly constitution .
which has prevented her making that progress in many accomplishments , which she could not otherwise have failed of .
as i am informed by the lady who superintended her education , and who still resides with them .
but she is perfectly amiable .
and often condescends to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies . ''
`` has she been presented ?
i do not remember her name among the ladies at court . ''
`` her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town .
and by that means .
as i told lady catherine myself one day , has deprived the british court of its brightest ornament .
her ladyship seemed pleased with the idea .
and you may imagine that i am happy on every occasion to
offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to ladies .
i have more than once observed to lady catherine .
that her charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess .
and that the most elevated rank .
instead of giving her consequence .
would be adorned by her.. these are the kind of little things which please her ladyship .
and it is a sort of attention which i conceive myself peculiarly bound to pay . ''
`` you judge very properly .
'' said mr. bennet .
`` and it is happy for you that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy .
may i ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment .
or are the result of previous study ? ''
`` they arise chiefly from what is passing at the time .
and though i sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such
little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions .
i always wish to give them as unstudied an air as possible . ''
mr. bennet 's expectations were fully answered .
his cousin was as absurd as he had hoped .
and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment .
maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance .
and except in an occasional glance at elizabeth , requiring no partner in his pleasure .
by tea-time however the dose had been enough .
and mr. bennet was glad to take his guest into the drawing-room again .
and when tea was over , glad to invite him to read aloud to the ladies .
mr. collins readily assented , and a book was produced .
but on beholding it .
( for every thing announced it to be from a circulating library .
) he started back .
and begging pardon .
protested that he never read novels.. kitty stared at him .
and lydia exclaimed.. other books were produced , and after some deliberation he chose fordyce 's sermons .
lydia gaped as he opened the volume .
and before he had .
with very monotonous solemnity .
read three pages .
she interrupted him with .
`` do you know .
mama .
that my uncle philips talks of turning away richard , and if he does , colonel forster will hire him .
my aunt told me so herself on saturday .
i shall walk to meryton to-morrow to hear more about it .
and to ask when mr. denny comes back from town . ''
lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue .
but mr. collins .
much offended .
laid aside his book .
and said .
`` i have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books of a serious stamp .
though written solely for their benefit .
it amazes me , i confess.. for certainly , there can be nothing so advantageous to them as instruction .
but i will no longer importune my young cousin . ''
then turning to mr. bennet , he offered himself as his antagonist at backgammon .
mr. bennet accepted the challenge .
observing that he acted very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements .
mrs. bennet and her daughters apologised most civilly for lydia's interruption .
and promised that it should not occur again , if he would resume his book .
but mr. collins .
after assuring them that he bore his young cousin no ill will .
and should never resent her behaviour as any affront .
seated himself at another table with mr. bennet , and prepared for backgammon .
mr. collins was not a sensible man .
and the deficiency of nature had been but little assisted by education or society .
the greatest part of his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and miserly father .
and though he belonged to one of the universities .
he had merely kept the necessary terms , without forming at it any useful acquaintance .
the subjection in which his father had brought him up .
had given him originally great humility of manner .
but it was now a good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head .
living in retirement , and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity .
a fortunate chance had recommended him to lady catherine de bourgh when the living of hunsford was vacant .
and the respect which he felt for her high rank .
and his veneration for her as his patroness .
mingling with a very good opinion of himself .
of his authority as a clergyman .
and his rights as a rector , made him altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness , self-importance and humility .
having now a good house and very sufficient income , he intended to marry .
and in seeking a reconciliation with the longbourn family he had a wife in view .
as he meant to chuse one of the daughters .
if he found them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report .
this was his plan of amends .
of atonement .
for inheriting their father's estate .
and he thought it an excellent one .
full of eligibility and suitableness , and excessively generous and disinterested on his own part .
his plan did not vary on seeing them.. miss bennet 's lovely face confirmed his views .
and established all his strictest notions of what was due to seniority .
and for the first evening she was his settled choice .
the next morning , however , made an alteration .
for in a quarter of an hour 's tête-à-tête with mrs. bennet before breakfast .
a conversation beginning with his parsonage-house .
and leading naturally to the avowal of his hopes .
that a mistress for it might be found at longbourn .
produced from her .
amid very complaisant smiles and general encouragement .
a caution against the very jane he had fixed on.. `` as
to her younger daughters she could not take upon her to say .
she could not positively answer .
but she did not know of any prepossession.. her eldest daughter , she must just mention .
she felt it incumbent on her to hint , was likely to be very soon engaged . ''
mr. collins had only to change from jane to elizabeth .
and it was soon done .
done while mrs. bennet was stirring the fire .
elizabeth , equally next to jane in birth and beauty , succeeded her of course .
mrs. bennet treasured up the hint , and trusted that she might soon have two daughters married .
and the man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before .
was now high in her good graces .
lydia 's intention of walking to meryton was not forgotten .
every sister except mary agreed to go with her .
and mr. collins was to attend them .
at the request of mr. bennet .
who was most anxious to get rid of him , and have his library to himself .
for thither mr. collins had followed him after breakfast .
and there he would continue .
nominally engaged with one of the largest folios in the collection .
but really talking to mr. bennet , with little cessation , of his house and garden at hunsford .
such doings discomposed mr. bennet exceedingly .
in his library he had been always sure of leisure and tranquillity .
and though prepared .
as he told elizabeth .
to meet with folly and conceit in every other room in the house .
he was used to be free from them there .
his civility , therefore , was most prompt in inviting mr. collins to join his daughters in their walk .
and mr. collins .
being in fact much better fitted for a walker than a reader .
was extremely well pleased to close his large book , and go .
in pompous nothings on his side .
and civil assents on that of his cousins , their time passed till they entered meryton .
the attention of the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by him .
their eyes were immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers .
and nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed .
or a really new muslin in a shop window , could recal them .
but the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man .
whom they had never seen before .
of most gentleman-like appearance , walking with an officer on the other side of the way .
the officer was the very mr. denny .
concerning whose return from london lydia came to inquire , and he bowed as they passed .
all were struck with the stranger 's air .
all wondered who he could be .
and kitty and lydia .
determined if possible to find out .
led the way across the street .
under pretence of wanting something in an opposite shop .
and fortunately had just gained the pavement when the two gentlemen turning back had reached the same spot .
mr. denny addressed them directly .
and entreated permission to introduce his friend .
mr. wickham .
who had returned with him the day before from town .
and he was happy to say had accepted a commission in their corps .
this was exactly as it should be .
for the young man wanted only regimentals to make him completely charming .
his appearance was greatly in his favour .
he had all the best part of beauty .
a fine countenance , a good figure , and very pleasing address .
the introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readiness of conversation .
a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming .
and the whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably .
when the sound of horses drew their notice , and darcy and bingley were seen riding down the street .
on distinguishing the ladies of the group .
the two gentlemen came directly towards them , and began the usual civilities .
bingley was the principal spokesman , and miss bennet the principal object .
he was then , he said , on his way to longbourn on purpose to inquire after her .
mr. darcy corroborated it with a bow .
and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes on elizabeth .
when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger .
and elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as they looked at each other .
was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting .
both changed colour , one looked white , the other red .
mr. wickham , after a few moments , touched his hat .
a salutation which mr. darcy just deigned to return .
what could be the meaning of it ? .
it was impossible to imagine .
it was impossible not to long to know .
in another minute mr. bingley .
but without seeming to have noticed what passed , took leave and rode on with his friend .
mr. denny and mr. wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of mr. philips 's house .
and then made their bows .
in spite of miss lydia's pressing entreaties that they would come in .
and even in spite of mrs. philips ' throwing up the parlour window , and loudly seconding the invitation .
mrs. philips was always glad to see her nieces .
and the two eldest .
from their recent absence .
were particularly welcome .
and she was eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home .
which .
as their own carriage had not fetched them .
she should have known nothing about .
if she had not happened to see mr. jones 's shop boy in the street .
who had told her that they were not to send any
more draughts to netherfield because the miss bennets were come away .
when her civility was claimed towards mr. collins by jane 's introduction of him .
she received him with her very best politeness .
which he returned with as much more .
apologising for his intrusion .
without any previous acquaintance with her .
which he could not help flattering himself however might be justified by
his relationship to the young ladies who introduced him to her notice .
mrs. philips was quite awed by such an excess of good breeding .
but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put an end to by exclamations and inquiries about the other .
of whom .
however .
she could only tell her nieces what they already knew .
that mr. denny had brought him from london , and that he was to have a lieutenant's commission in the .
.
shire .
she had been watching him the last hour .
she said .
as he walked up and down the street .
and had mr. wickham appeared kitty and lydia would certainly have continued the occupation .
but unluckily no one passed the windows now except a few of the officers .
who in comparison with the stranger , were become `` stupid , disagreeable fellows . ''
some of them were to dine with the philipses the next day .
and their aunt promised to make her husband call on mr. wickham .
and give him an invitation also , if the family from longbourn would come in the evening .
this was agreed to .
and mrs. philips protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery tickets .
and a little bit of hot supper afterwards .
the prospect of such delights was very cheering , and they parted in mutual good spirits .
mr. collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room .
and was assured with unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless .
as they walked home , elizabeth related to jane what she had seen pass between the two gentlemen .
but though jane would have defended either or both .
had they appeared to be wrong , she could no more explain such behaviour than her sister .
mr. collins on his return highly gratified mrs. bennet by admiring mrs. philips 's manners and politeness .
he protested that except lady catherine and her daughter , he had never seen a more elegant woman .
for she had not only received him with the utmost civility .
but had even pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening , although utterly unknown to her before .
something he supposed might be attributed to his connection with them .
but yet he had never met with so much attention in the whole course of his life .
as no objection was made to the young people 's engagement with their aunt .
and all mr. collins 's scruples of leaving mr. and mrs. bennet
for a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted .
the coach conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to meryton .
and the girls had the pleasure of hearing .
as they entered the drawing-room .
that mr. wickham had accepted their uncle 's invitation , and was then in the house .
when this information was given .
and they had all taken their seats .
mr. collins was at leisure to look around him and admire .
and he was so much struck with the size and furniture of the apartment .
that he declared he might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast parlour at rosings .
a comparison that did not at first convey much gratification .
but when mrs. philips understood from him what rosings was .
and who was its proprietor .
when she had listened to the description of only one of lady catherine 's drawing-rooms .
and found that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds .
she felt all the force of the compliment .
and would hardly have resented a comparison with the housekeeper 's room .
in describing to her all the grandeur of lady catherine and her mansion .
with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode .
and the improvements it was receiving , he was happily employed until the gentlemen joined them .
and he found in mrs. philips a very attentive listener .
whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she heard .
and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as soon as she could .
to the girls .
who could not listen to their cousin .
and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument .
and examine their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantle-piece , the interval of waiting appeared very long .
it was over at last however .
the gentlemen did approach .
and when mr. wickham walked into the room .
elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before .
nor thinking of him since , with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration .
the officers of the .
.
shire were in general a very creditable .
gentleman-like set , and the best of them were of the present party .
but mr. wickham was as far beyond them all in person .
countenance , air .
and walk .
as they were superior to the broad-faced stuffy uncle philips .
breathing port wine , who followed them into the room .
mr. wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned .
and elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated himself .
and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into conversation .
though it was only on its being a wet night .
and on the probability of a rainy season .
made her feel that the commonest .
dullest , most thread-bare topic might be rendered interesting by the skill of the speaker .
with such rivals for the notice of the fair .
as mr. wickham and the officers , mr. collins seemed likely to sink into insignificance .
to the young ladies he certainly was nothing .
but he had still at intervals a kind listener in mrs. philips .
and was , by her watchfulness , most abundantly supplied with coffee and muffin .
when the card tables were placed .
he had an opportunity of obliging her in return , by sitting down to whist .
`` i know little of the game .
at present .
'' said he , `` but i shall be glad to improve myself , for in my situation of life .
. ``
mrs. philips was very thankful for his compliance , but could not wait for his reason .
mr. wickham did not play at whist .
and with ready delight was he received at the other table between elizabeth and lydia .
at first there seemed danger of lydia 's engrossing him entirely , for she was a most determined talker .
but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets .
she soon grew too much interested in the game .
too eager in making bets and exclaiming after prizes , to have attention for any one in particular .
allowing for the common demands of the game .
mr. wickham was therefore at leisure to talk to elizabeth .
and she was very willing to hear him .
though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be told .
the history of his acquaintance with mr. darcy .
she dared not even mention that gentleman .
her curiosity however was unexpectedly relieved .
mr. wickham began the subject himself .
he inquired how far netherfield was from meryton .
and , after receiving her answer , asked in an hesitating manner how long mr. darcy had been staying there .
`` about a month , '' said elizabeth .
and then .
unwilling to let the subject drop .
added , `` he is a man of very large property in derbyshire , i understand . ''
`` yes , '' replied wickham.. `` his estate there is a noble one .
a clear ten thousand per annum .
you could not have met with a person more capable of giving you certain information on that head than myself .
for i have been connected with his family in a particular manner from my infancy . ''
elizabeth could not but look surprised .
`` you may well be surprised .
miss bennet .
at such an assertion .
after seeing .
as you probably might , the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday.. are you much acquainted with mr .
darcy ? ''
`` as much as i ever wish to be , '' cried elizabeth warmly , .
`` i have spent four days in the same house with him , and i think him very disagreeable . ''
`` i have no right to give my opinion .
'' said wickham , `` as to his being agreeable or otherwise .
i am not qualified to form one .
i have known him too long and too well to be a fair judge .
it is impossible for me to be impartial .
but i believe your opinion of him would in general astonish .
and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly anywhere else.. here you are in your own family . ''
`` upon my word i say no more here than i might say in any house in the neighbourhood .
except netherfield .
he is not at all liked in hertfordshire .
every body is disgusted with his pride .
you will not find him more favourably spoken of by any one . ''
`` i can not pretend to be sorry .
'' said wickham .
after a short interruption , `` that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond their deserts .
but with him i believe it does not often happen .
the world is blinded by his fortune and consequence .
or frightened by his high and imposing manners , and sees him only as he chuses to be seen . ''
`` i should take him , even on my slight acquaintance , to be an ill-tempered man . ''
wickham only shook his head .
`` i wonder .
'' said he .
at the next opportunity of speaking , `` whether he is likely to be in this country much longer . ''
`` i do not at all know .
but i heard nothing of his going away when i was at netherfield .
i hope your plans in favour of the .
.
shire will not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood . ''
`` oh !
no .
it is not for me to be driven away by mr. darcy .
if he wishes to avoid seeing me , he must go .
we are not on friendly terms .
and it always gives me pain to meet him .
but i have no reason for avoiding him but what i might proclaim to all the world .
a sense of very great ill usage , and most painful regrets at his being what he is .
his father .
miss bennet .
the late mr. darcy .
was one of the best men that ever breathed , and the truest friend i ever had .
and i can never be in company with this mr. darcy
without being grieved to the soul by a thousand tender recollections .
his behaviour to myself has been scandalous .
but i verily believe i could forgive him any thing and every thing .
rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the memory of his father . ''
elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase , and listened with all her heart .
but the delicacy of it prevented farther inquiry .
mr. wickham began to speak on more general topics .
meryton .
the neighbourhood .
the society .
appearing highly pleased with all that he had yet seen .
and speaking of the latter especially , with gentle but very intelligible gallantry .
`` it was the prospect of constant society .
and good society , '' he added , '' which was my chief inducement to enter the .
.
shire .
i knew it to be a most respectable .
agreeable corps .
and my friend denny tempted me farther by his account of their present quarters .
and the very great attentions and excellent acquaintance meryton had procured them .
society , i own , is necessary to me .
i have been a disappointed man , and my spirits will not bear solitude .
i must have employment and society .
a military life is not what i was intended for , but circumstances have now made it eligible .
the church ought to have been my profession .
i was brought up for the church .
and i should at this time have been in possession of a most valuable living .
had it pleased the gentleman we were speaking of just now . ''
`` indeed ! ''
`` yes .
the late mr. darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best living in his gift .
he was my godfather , and excessively attached to me .
i can not do justice to his kindness .
he meant to provide for me amply , and thought he had done it .
but when the living fell , it was given elsewhere . ''
`` good heavens ! ''
cried elizabeth .
`` but how could that be ? .
how could his will be disregarded ? .
why did not you seek legal redress ? ''
`` there was just such an informality in the terms of
the bequest as to give me no hope from law .
a man of honour could not have doubted the intention , but mr. darcy chose to doubt it .
or to treat it as a merely conditional recommendation .
and to assert that i had forfeited all claim to it by extravagance .
imprudence , in short any thing or nothing .
certain it is .
that the living became vacant two years ago .
exactly as i was of an age to hold it , and that it was given to another man .
and no less certain is it .
that i can not accuse myself of having really done any thing to deserve to lose it .
i have a warm .
unguarded temper .
and i may perhaps have sometimes spoken my opinion of him , and to him , too freely .
i can recal nothing worse .
but the fact is , that we are very different sort of men , and that he hates me . ''
`` this is quite shocking ! .
he deserves to be publicly disgraced . ''
`` some time or other he will be .
but it shall not be by me .
till i can forget his father , i can never defy or expose him . ''
elizabeth honoured him for such feelings , and thought him handsomer than ever as he expressed them .
`` but what , '' said she , after a pause , `` can have been his motive ? .
what can have induced him to behave so cruelly ? ''
`` a thorough , determined dislike of me .
a dislike which i can not but attribute in some measure to jealousy .
had the late mr. darcy liked me less , his son might have borne with me better .
but his father 's uncommon attachment to me , irritated him i believe very early in life .
he had not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood .
the sort of preference which was often given me . ''
`` i had not thought mr. darcy so bad as this .
though i have never liked him , i had not thought so very ill of him .
i had supposed him to be despising his fellow-creatures in general .
but did not suspect him of descending to such malicious revenge , such injustice , such inhumanity as this ! ''
after a few minutes reflection .
however .
she continued .
`` i do remember his boasting one day .
at netherfield , of the implacability of his resentments , of his having an unforgiving temper .
his disposition must be dreadful . ''
`` i will not trust myself on the subject .
'' replied wickham , `` i can hardly be just to him . ''
elizabeth was again deep in thought .
and after a time exclaimed .
`` to treat in such a manner .
the god-son , the friend , the favourite of his father ! `` .
she could have added .
`` a young man too , like you , whose very countenance may vouch for your being amiable '' .
but she contented herself with `` and one .
too .
who had probably been his own companion from childhood .
connected together , as i think you said , in the closest manner ! ''
`` we were born in the same parish .
within the same park , the greatest part of our youth was passed together .
inmates of the same house , sharing the same amusements , objects of the same parental care .
my father began life in the profession which your uncle .
mr. philips , appears to do so much credit to .
but he gave up every thing to be of use to the late mr. darcy .
and devoted all his time to the care of the pemberley property .
he was most highly esteemed by mr. darcy , a most intimate , confidential friend .
mr. darcy often acknowledged himself to be under the greatest obligations to my father 's active superintendance .
and when immediately before my father 's death .
mr. darcy gave him a voluntary promise of providing for me .
i am convinced that he felt it to be as much a debt of gratitude to him .
as of affection to myself . ''
`` how strange ! ''
cried elizabeth .
`` how abominable ! .
i wonder that the very pride of this mr. darcy has not made him just to you ! .
if from no better motive , that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest , .
for dishonesty i must call it . ''
`` it is wonderful , '' .
replied wickham , .
`` for almost all his actions may be traced to pride.. and pride has often been his best friend .
it has connected him nearer with virtue than any other feeling .
but we are none of us consistent .
and in his behaviour to me , there were stronger impulses even than pride . ''
`` can such abominable pride as his , have ever done him good ? ''
`` yes .
it has often led him to be liberal and generous , .
to give his money freely , to display hospitality , to assist his tenants , and relieve the poor .
family pride .
and filial pride , for he is very proud of what his father was , have done this .
not to appear to disgrace his family .
to degenerate from the popular qualities , or lose the influence of the pemberley house , is a powerful motive .
he has also brotherly pride .
which with some brotherly affection , makes him a very kind and careful guardian of his sister .
and you will hear him generally cried up as the most attentive and best of brothers . ''
`` what sort of a girl is miss darcy ? ''
he shook his head.. `` i wish i could call her amiable .
it gives me pain to speak ill of a darcy .
but she is too much like her brother , .
very , very proud.. as a child , she was affectionate and pleasing , and extremely fond of me .
and i have devoted hours and hours to her amusement .
but she is nothing to me now .
she is a handsome girl , about fifteen or sixteen , and i understand highly accomplished .
since her father 's death .
her home has been london , where a lady lives with her , and superintends her education . ''
after many pauses and many trials of other subjects .
elizabeth could not help reverting once more to the first .
and saying , `` i am astonished at his intimacy with mr. bingley !
how can mr. bingley .
who seems good humour itself .
and is , i really believe , truly amiable , be in friendship with such a man ?
how can they suit each other ? .
do you know mr .
bingley ? ''
`` not at all . ''
`` he is a sweet tempered , amiable , charming man .
he can not know what mr. darcy is . ''
`` probably not.. but mr. darcy can please where he chuses .
he does not want abilities .
he can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth his while .
among those who are at all his equals in consequence .
he is a very different man from what he is to the less prosperous .
his pride never deserts him .
but with the rich .
he is liberal-minded , just , sincere , rational , honourable , and perhaps agreeable , .
allowing something for fortune and figure . ''
the whist party soon afterwards breaking up .
the players gathered round the other table .
and mr. collins took his station between his cousin elizabeth and mrs. philips..
the usual inquiries as to his success were made by the latter .
it had not been very great .
he had lost every point .
but when mrs. philips began to express her concern thereupon .
he assured her with much earnest gravity that it was not of the least importance .
that he considered the money as a mere trifle , and begged she would not make herself uneasy .
`` i know very well .
madam .
'' said he .
`` that when persons sit down to a card table , they must take their chance of these things , .
and happily i am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object .
there are undoubtedly many who could not say the same .
but thanks to lady catherine de bourgh , i am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little matters . ''
mr. wickham 's attention was caught .
and after observing mr. collins for a few moments .
he asked elizabeth in a low voice whether her relation were very intimately acquainted with the family of de bourgh .
`` lady catherine de bourgh , '' she replied , `` has very lately given him a living .
i hardly know how mr. collins was first introduced to her notice .
but he certainly has not known her long . ''
`` you know of course that lady catherine de bourgh and lady anne darcy were sisters .
consequently that she is aunt to the present mr .
darcy . ''
`` no , indeed , i did not.. i knew nothing at all of lady catherine's connections .
i never heard of her existence till the day before yesterday . ''
`` her daughter .
miss de bourgh .
will have a very large fortune .
and it is believed that she and her cousin will unite the two estates . ''
this information made elizabeth smile , as she thought of poor miss bingley .
vain indeed must be all her attentions .
vain and useless her affection for his sister and her praise of himself .
if he were already self-destined to another .
`` mr. collins , '' said she , `` speaks highly both of lady catherine and her daughter .
but from some particulars that he has related of her ladyship .
i suspect his gratitude misleads him .
and that in spite of her being his patroness , she is an arrogant , conceited woman . ''
`` i believe her to be both in a great degree , '' replied wickham .
`` i have not seen her for many years .
but i very well remember that i never liked her , and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent .
she has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever .
but i rather believe she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune .
part from her authoritative manner .
and the rest from the pride of her nephew .
who chuses that every one connected with him should have an understanding of the first class . ''
elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it .
and they continued talking together with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to cards .
and gave the rest of the ladies their share of mr. wickham 's attentions .
there could be no conversation in the noise of mrs. philips 's supper party .
but his manners recommended him to every body .
whatever he said , was said well .
and whatever he did , done gracefully .
elizabeth went away with her head full of him .
she could think of nothing but of mr. wickham .
and of what he had told her , all the way home .
but there was not time for her even to mention his name as they went .
for neither lydia nor mr. collins were once silent .
lydia talked incessantly of lottery tickets .
of the fish she had lost and the fish she had won .
and mr. collins .
in describing the civility of mr. and mrs. philips .
protesting that he did not in the least regard his losses at whist .
enumerating all the dishes at supper .
and repeatedly fearing that he crouded his cousins .
had more to say than he could well manage before the carriage stopped at longbourn house .
elizabeth related to jane the next day , what had passed between mr. wickham and herself .
jane listened with astonishment and concern.. she knew not how to believe
that mr. darcy could be so unworthy of mr. bingley 's regard .
and yet .
it was not in her nature to question the veracity of a young man of
such amiable appearance as wickham.. the possibility of his having really endured such unkindness .
was enough to interest all her tender feelings .
and nothing therefore remained to be done .
but to think well of them both .
to defend the conduct of each .
and throw into the account of accident or mistake , whatever could not be otherwise explained .
`` they have both .
'' said she .
`` been deceived .
i dare say , in some way or other , of which we can form no idea .
interested people have perhaps misrepresented each to the other .
it is .
in short .
impossible for us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them .
without actual blame on either side . ''
`` very true .
indeed.. and now .
my dear jane .
what have you got to say in behalf of the interested
people who have probably been concerned in the business ? .
do clear them too , or we shall be obliged to think ill of somebody . ''
`` laugh as much as you chuse , but you will not laugh me out of my opinion .
my dearest lizzy .
do but consider in what a disgraceful light it places mr. darcy .
to be treating his father 's favourite in such a manner , .
one , whom his father had promised to provide for.. it is impossible .
no man of common humanity .
no man who had any value for his character , could be capable of it .
can his most intimate friends be so excessively deceived in him ?
oh !
no . ''
`` i can much more easily believe mr. bingley 's being imposed on .
than that mr. wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last night .
names , facts , every thing mentioned without ceremony.. if it be not so , let mr. darcy contradict it .
besides , there was truth in his looks . ''
`` it is difficult indeed .
it is distressing.. one does not know what to think . ''
`` i beg your pardon.. one knows exactly what to think . ''
but jane could think with certainty on only one point , .
that mr. bingley .
if he had been imposed on , would have much to suffer when the affair became public .
the two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery where this conversation passed .
by the arrival of some of the very persons of whom they had been speaking .
mr. bingley and his sisters came to give their personal invitation for the long expected ball at netherfield .
which was fixed for the following tuesday .
the two ladies were delighted to see their dear friend again .
called it an age since they had met .
and repeatedly asked what she had been doing with herself since their separation .
to the rest of the family they paid little attention .
avoiding mrs. bennet as much as possible .
saying not much to elizabeth , and nothing at all to the others .
they were soon gone again .
rising from their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise .
and hurrying off as if eager to escape from mrs. bennet 's civilities .
the prospect of the netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every female of the family .
mrs. bennet chose to consider it as given in compliment to her eldest daughter .
and was particularly flattered by receiving the invitation from mr. bingley himself , instead of a ceremonious card .
jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the society of her two friends .
and the attentions of their brother .
and elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with mr. wickham .
and of seeing a confirmation of every thing in mr. darcy's looks and behaviour .
the happiness anticipated by catherine and lydia .
depended less on any single event .
or any particular person .
for though they each .
like elizabeth .
meant to dance half the evening with mr. wickham .
he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them .
and a ball was at any rate , a ball .
and even mary could assure her family that she had no disinclination for it .
`` while i can have my mornings to myself .
'' said she , `` it is enough.. i think it no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements .
society has claims on us all .
and i profess myself one of those who consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for every body . ''
elizabeth 's spirits were so high on the occasion .
that though she did not often speak unnecessarily to mr. collins .
she could not help asking him whether he intended to accept mr. bingley 's invitation .
and if he did , whether he would think it proper to join in the evening's amusement .
and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no scruple whatever on that head .
and was very far from dreading a rebuke either from the archbishop .
or lady catherine de bourgh , by venturing to dance .
`` i am by no means of opinion .
i assure you .
'' said he .
`` that a ball of this kind .
given by a young man of character , to respectable people , can have any evil tendency .
and i am so far from objecting to dancing myself that i shall hope to be
honoured with the hands of all my fair cousins in the course of the evening .
and i take this opportunity of soliciting yours , miss elizabeth , for the two first dances especially , .
a preference which i trust my cousin jane will attribute to the right cause .
and not to any disrespect for her . ''
elizabeth felt herself completely taken in .
she had fully proposed being engaged by wickham for those very dances : .
and to have mr. collins instead !
her liveliness had been never worse timed .
there was no help for it however .
mr. wickham 's happiness and her own was per force delayed a little longer .
and mr. collins 's proposal accepted with as good a grace as she could .
she was not the better pleased with his gallantry .
from the idea it suggested of something more.. it now first struck her .
that she was selected from among her sisters as worthy of being the mistress of hunsford parsonage .
and of assisting to form a quadrille table at rosings , in the absence of more eligible visitors .
the idea soon reached to conviction .
as she observed his increasing civilities toward herself .
and heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on her wit and vivacity .
and though more astonished than gratified herself .
by this effect of her charms .
it was not long before her mother gave her to understand
that the probability of their marriage was exceedingly agreeable to her .
elizabeth however did not chuse to take the hint .
being well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any reply .
mr. collins might never make the offer , and till he did , it was useless to quarrel about him .
if there had not been a netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of .
the younger miss bennets would have been in a pitiable state at this time .
for from the day of the invitation .
to the day of the ball .
there was such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to meryton once .
no aunt .
no officers , no news could be sought after.. the very shoe-roses for netherfield were got by proxy .
even elizabeth might have found some trial of her patience in weather .
which totally suspended the improvement of her acquaintance with mr. wickham .
and nothing less than a dance on tuesday .
could have made such a friday , saturday , sunday and monday , endurable to kitty and lydia .
till elizabeth entered the drawing-room at netherfield and looked in vain
for mr. wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled .
a doubt of his being present had never occurred to her .
the certainty of meeting him had not been checked by any
of those recollections that might not unreasonably have alarmed her .
she had dressed with more than usual care .
and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all that remained unsubdued of his heart .
trusting that it was not more than might be won in the course of the evening .
but in an instant arose the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted
for mr. darcy's pleasure in the bingleys ' invitation to the officers .
and though this was not exactly the case .
the absolute fact of his absence was pronounced by his friend mr. denny .
to whom lydia eagerly applied .
and who told them that wickham had been obliged to go to town on business the day before .
and was not yet returned .
adding .
with a significant smile .
`` i do not imagine his business would have called him away just now .
if he had not wished to avoid a certain gentleman here . ''
this part of his intelligence .
though unheard by lydia .
was caught by elizabeth .
and as it assured her that darcy was not less answerable for
wickham 's absence than if her first surmise had been just .
every feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment .
that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make.. attention .
forbearance , patience with darcy , was injury to wickham .
she was resolved against any sort of conversation with him .
and turned away with a degree of ill humour .
which she could not wholly surmount even in speaking to mr. bingley , whose blind partiality provoked her .
but elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour .
and though every prospect of her own was destroyed for the evening .
it could not dwell long on her spirits .
and having told all her griefs to charlotte lucas .
whom she had not seen for a week .
she was soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of her cousin .
and to point him out to her particular notice .
the two first dances , however , brought a return of distress .
they were dances of mortification .
mr. collins .
awkward and solemn .
apologising instead of attending .
and often moving wrong without being aware of it .
gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give .
the moment of her release from him was ecstacy .
she danced next with an officer .
and had the refreshment of talking of wickham , and of hearing that he was universally liked .
when those dances were over she returned to charlotte lucas .
and was in conversation with her .
when she found herself suddenly addressed by mr. darcy .
who took her so much by surprise in his application for her hand .
that , without knowing what she did , she accepted him .
he walked away again immediately , and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of mind .
charlotte tried to console her .
`` i dare say you will find him very agreeable . ''
`` heaven forbid ! .
that would be the greatest misfortune of all ! .
to find a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate ! .
do not wish me such an evil . ''
when the dancing recommenced .
however .
and darcy approached to claim her hand .
charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper not to be a simpleton and allow her fancy
for wickham to make her appear unpleasant in the eyes of a man of ten times his consequence .
elizabeth made no answer .
and took her place in the set .
amazed at the dignity to which she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to mr. darcy .
and reading in her neighbours ' looks their equal amazement in beholding it .
they stood for some time without speaking a word .
and she began to imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances .
and at first was resolved not to break it .
till suddenly fancying that it would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk .
she made some slight observation on the dance .
he replied , and was again silent .
after a pause of some minutes she addressed him a second
time with `` it is your turn to say something now .
mr. darcy.. i talked about the dance .
and you ought to make some kind of remark on the size of the room .
or the number of couples . ''
he smiled , and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be said .
`` very well.. that reply will do for the present.. perhaps by and bye i may observe
that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones.. but now we may be silent . ''
`` do you talk by rule then , while you are dancing ? ''
`` sometimes .
one must speak a little , you know .
it would look odd to be entirely silent for half an hour together .
and yet for the advantage of some .
conversation ought to be so arranged as that they may have the trouble of saying as little as possible . ''
`` are you consulting your own feelings in the present case .
or do you imagine that you are gratifying mine ? ''
`` both , '' replied elizabeth archly .
`` for i have always seen a great similarity in the
turn of our minds.. we are each of an unsocial .
taciturn disposition .
unwilling to speak .
unless we expect to say something that will amaze the whole room .
and be handed down to posterity with all the eclat of a proverb . ''
`` this is no very striking resemblance of your own character , i am sure , '' said he .
`` how near it may be to mine .
i can not pretend to say.. you think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly . ''
`` i must not decide on my own performance . ''
he made no answer .
and they were again silent till they had gone down the dance .
when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often walk to meryton .
she answered in the affirmative .
and .
unable to resist the temptation .
added .
`` when you met us there the other day , we had just been forming a new acquaintance . ''
the effect was immediate .
a deeper shade of hauteur overspread his features .
but he said not a word .
and elizabeth , though blaming herself for her own weakness , could not go on .
at length darcy spoke .
and in a constrained manner said .
`` mr. wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his making friends .
whether he may be equally capable of retaining them , is less certain . ''
`` he has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship .
'' replied elizabeth with emphasis .
`` and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all his life . ''
darcy made no answer , and seemed desirous of changing the subject .
at that moment sir william lucas appeared close to them .
meaning to pass through the set to the other side of the room .
but on perceiving mr. darcy he stopt with a bow of
superior courtesy to compliment him on his dancing and his partner .
`` i have been most highly gratified indeed , my dear sir .
such very superior dancing is not often seen .
it is evident that you belong to the first circles .
allow me to say .
however .
that your fair partner does not disgrace you .
and that i must hope to have this pleasure often repeated .
especially when a certain desirable event .
my dear miss eliza , ( glancing at her sister and bingley , ) shall take place .
what congratulations will then flow in !
i appeal to mr. darcy : .
but let me not interrupt you .
sir.. you will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that young lady .
whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me . ''
the latter part of this address was scarcely heard by darcy .
but sir william 's allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly .
and his eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards bingley and jane , who were dancing together .
recovering himself .
however .
shortly .
he turned to his partner .
and said , `` sir william 's interruption has made me forget what we were talking of . ''
`` i do not think we were speaking at all .
sir william could not have interrupted any two people in the room who had less
to say for themselves.. we have tried two or three subjects already without success .
and what we are to talk of next i can not imagine . ''
`` what think you of books ? ''
said he , smiling .
`` books .
oh !
no.. i am sure we never read the same , or not with the same feelings . ''
`` i am sorry you think so .
but if that be the case .
there can at least be no want of subject.. we may compare our different opinions . ''
`` no .
i can not talk of books in a ball-room .
my head is always full of something else . ''
`` the present always occupies you in such scenes .
does it ? ''
said he , with a look of doubt .
`` yes , always .
'' she replied .
without knowing what she said .
for her thoughts had wandered far from the subject .
as soon afterwards appeared by her suddenly exclaiming .
`` i remember hearing you once say .
mr. darcy , that you hardly ever forgave , that your resentment once created was unappeasable .
you are very cautious , i suppose , as to its being created . ''
`` i am , '' said he , with a firm voice .
`` and never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice ? ''
`` i hope not . ''
`` it is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion .
to be secure of judging properly at first . ''
`` may i ask to what these questions tend ? ''
`` merely to the illustration of your character , '' said she , endeavouring to shake off her gravity .
`` i am trying to make it out . ''
`` and what is your success ? ''
she shook her head .
`` i do not get on at all .
i hear such different accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly . ''
`` i can readily believe .
'' answered he gravely , `` that report may vary greatly with respect to me .
and i could wish .
miss bennet .
that you were not to sketch my character at the present moment .
as there is reason to fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either . ''
`` but if i do not take your likeness now , i may never have another opportunity . ''
`` i would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours , '' he coldly replied .
she said no more , and they went down the other dance and parted in silence .
on each side dissatisfied .
though not to an equal degree .
for in darcy 's breast there was a tolerable powerful feeling towards her .
which soon procured her pardon , and directed all his anger against another .
they had not long separated when miss bingley came towards her .
and with an expression of civil disdain thus accosted her .
`` so , miss eliza , i hear you are quite delighted with george wickham ! .
your sister has been talking to me about him , and asking me a thousand questions .
and i find that the young man forgot to tell you .
among his other communications , that he was the son of old wickham , the late mr. darcy 's steward .
let me recommend you , however , as a friend , not to give implicit confidence to all his assertions .
for as to mr. darcy 's using him ill , it is perfectly false .
for .
on the contrary .
he has been always remarkably kind to him .
though george wickham has treated mr. darcy in a most infamous manner .
i do not know the particulars .
but i know very well that mr. darcy is not in the least to blame .
that he can not bear to hear george wickham mentioned .
and that though my brother thought he could not well avoid including him in his invitation to the officers .
he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way .
his coming into the country at all .
is a most insolent thing indeed , and i wonder how he could presume to do it .
i pity you , miss eliza , for this discovery of your favourite 's guilt .
but really considering his descent , one could not expect much better . ''
`` his guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same , '' said elizabeth angrily .
`` for i have heard you accuse him of nothing worse
than of being the son of mr. darcy 's steward .
and of that , i can assure you , he informed me himself . ''
`` i beg your pardon , '' replied miss bingley , turning away with a sneer .
`` excuse my interference.. it was kindly meant . ''
`` insolent girl ! ''
said elizabeth to herself.. `` you are much mistaken if you
expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this .
i see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of mr .
darcy . ''
she then sought her eldest sister , who had undertaken to make inquiries on the same subject of bingley .
jane met her with a smile of such sweet complacency .
a glow of such happy expression .
as sufficiently marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening.. elizabeth instantly read her feelings .
and at that moment solicitude for wickham .
resentment against his enemies .
and every thing else gave way before the hope of jane 's being in the fairest way for happiness .
`` i want to know .
'' said she .
with a countenance no less smiling than her sister 's , `` what you have learnt about mr. wickham .
but perhaps you have been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person .
in which case you may be sure of my pardon . ''
`` no , '' replied jane , `` i have not forgotten him .
but i have nothing satisfactory to tell you .
mr. bingley does not know the whole of his history .
and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have principally offended mr. darcy .
but he will vouch for the good conduct .
the probity and honour of his friend .
and is perfectly convinced that mr. wickham has deserved much less attention from mr. darcy than he has received .
and i am sorry to say that by his account as well as his sister 's .
mr. wickham is by no means a respectable young man .
i am afraid he has been very imprudent , and has deserved to lose mr. darcy's regard . ''
`` mr. bingley does not know mr. wickham himself ? ''
`` no .
he never saw him till the other morning at meryton . ''
`` this account then is what he has received from mr. darcy .
i am perfectly satisfied .
but what does he say of the living ? ''
`` he does not exactly recollect the circumstances .
though he has heard them from mr. darcy more than once .
but he believes that it was left to him conditionally only . ''
`` i have not a doubt of mr. bingley 's sincerity , '' said elizabeth warmly .
`` but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only .
mr. bingley 's defence of his friend was a very able one i dare say .
but since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story .
and has learnt the rest from that friend himself .
i shall venture still to think of both gentlemen as i did before . ''
she then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each .
and on which there could be no difference of sentiment .
elizabeth listened with delight to the happy .
though modest hopes which jane entertained of bingley 's regard .
and said all in her power to heighten her confidence in it .
on their being joined by mr. bingley himself , elizabeth withdrew to miss lucas .
to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she had scarcely replied .
before mr. collins came up to them and told her with great exultation that
he had just been so fortunate as to make a most important discovery .
`` i have found out .
'' said he .
`` by a singular accident , that there is now in the room a near relation of my patroness .
i happened to overhear the gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does
the honours of this house the names of his cousin miss de bourgh .
and of her mother lady catherine .
how wonderfully these sort of things occur !
who would have thought of my meeting with .
perhaps .
a nephew of lady catherine de bourgh in this assembly ! .
i am most thankful that the discovery is made in time for me to pay my respects to him .
which i am now going to do , and trust he will excuse my not having done it before .
my total ignorance of the connection must plead my apology . ''
`` you are not going to introduce yourself to mr .
darcy ? ''
`` indeed i am .
i shall intreat his pardon for not having done it earlier .
i believe him to be lady catherine 's nephew .
it will be in my power to assure him that her ladyship was quite well yesterday se'night . ''
elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme .
assuring him that mr. darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as an impertinent freedom .
rather than a compliment to his aunt .
that it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either side .
and that if it were .
it must belong to mr. darcy .
the superior in consequence .
to begin the acquaintance.. mr. collins listened to her with the determined air of following his own inclination .
and when she ceased speaking .
replied thus .
`` my dear miss elizabeth .
i have the highest opinion in the world of your excellent
judgment in all matters within the scope of your understanding .
but permit me to say that there must be a wide
difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity .
and those which regulate the clergy .
for give me leave to observe that i consider the clerical office as
equal in point of dignity with the highest rank in the kingdom .
provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same time maintained .
you must therefore allow me to follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion .
which leads me to perform what i look on as a point of duty .
pardon me for neglecting to profit by your advice .
which on every other subject shall be my constant guide .
though in the case before us i consider myself more fitted by education and habitual
study to decide on what is right than a young lady like yourself . ''
and with a low bow he left her to attack mr. darcy .
whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched , and whose astonishment at being so addressed was very evident .
her cousin prefaced his speech with a solemn bow .
and though she could not hear a word of it .
she felt as if hearing it all .
and saw in the motion of his lips the words `` apology .
'' '' hunsford , '' and `` lady catherine de bourgh . `` .
it vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man .
mr. darcy was eyeing him with unrestrained wonder .
and when at last mr. collins allowed him time to speak , replied with an air of distant civility .
mr. collins .
however .
was not discouraged from speaking again .
and mr. darcy 's contempt seemed abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech .
and at the end of it he only made him a slight bow , and moved another way .
mr. collins then returned to elizabeth .
`` i have no reason .
i assure you , '' said he , `` to be dissatisfied with my reception .
mr. darcy seemed much pleased with the attention .
he answered me with the utmost civility .
and even paid me the compliment of saying .
that he was so well convinced of lady catherine 's discernment
as to be certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily .
it was really a very handsome thought .
upon the whole , i am much pleased with him . ''
as elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue .
she turned her attention almost entirely on her sister and mr. bingley .
and the train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to .
made her perhaps almost as happy as jane .
she saw her in idea settled in that very house in
all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow .
and she felt capable under such circumstances , of endeavouring even to like bingley 's two sisters .
her mother 's thoughts she plainly saw were bent the same way .
and she determined not to venture near her , lest she might hear too much .
when they sat down to supper .
therefore , she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within one of each other .
and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was
talking to that one person ( lady lucas ) freely .
openly .
and of nothing else but of her expectation that jane would
be soon married to mr. bingley.. it was an animating subject .
and mrs. bennet seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the match .
his being such a charming young man .
and so rich , and living but three miles from them , were the first points of self-gratulation .
and then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of jane .
and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do .
it was .
moreover .
such a promising thing for her younger daughters .
as jane 's marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of other rich men .
and lastly .
it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able
to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister .
that she might not be obliged to go into company more than she liked .
it was necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure , because on such occasions it is the etiquette .
but no one was less likely than mrs. bennet to find
comfort in staying at home at any period of her life .
she concluded with many good wishes that lady lucas might soon be equally fortunate .
though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no chance of it .
in vain did elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother's words .
or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible whisper .
for to her inexpressible vexation .
she could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by mr. darcy , who sat opposite to them .
her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical .
`` what is mr. darcy to me , pray , that i should be afraid of him ?
i am sure we owe him no such particular civility as to
be obliged to say nothing he may not like to hear . ''
`` for heaven 's sake .
madam , speak lower.. what advantage can it be to you to offend mr. darcy ? .
you will never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing . ''
nothing that she could say , however , had any influence .
her mother would talk of her views in the same intelligible tone .
elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation .
she could not help frequently glancing her eye at mr. darcy .
though every glance convinced her of what she dreaded .
for though he was not always looking at her mother .
she was convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her .
the expression of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and steady gravity .
at length however mrs. bennet had no more to say .
and lady lucas .
who had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of sharing .
was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken .
elizabeth now began to revive .
but not long was the interval of tranquillity .
for when supper was over .
singing was talked of .
and she had the mortification of seeing mary , after very little entreaty , preparing to oblige the company .
by many significant looks and silent entreaties , did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance , .
but in vain .
mary would not understand them .
such an opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her , and she began her song .
elizabeth 's eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations .
and she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very ill rewarded at their close .
for mary .
on receiving amongst the thanks of the table .
the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to favour them again .
after the pause of half a minute began another .
mary 's powers were by no means fitted for such a display .
her voice was weak , and her manner affected.. elizabeth was in agonies .
she looked at jane , to see how she bore it .
but jane was very composedly talking to bingley .
she looked at his two sisters .
and saw them making signs of derision at each other , and at darcy , who continued however impenetrably grave .
she looked at her father to entreat his interference , lest mary should be singing all night .
he took the hint .
and when mary had finished her second song , said aloud , `` that will do extremely well , child .
you have delighted us long enough .
let the other young ladies have time to exhibit . ''
mary , though pretending not to hear , was somewhat disconcerted .
and elizabeth sorry for her .
and sorry for her father 's speech .
was afraid her anxiety had done no good.. others of the party were now applied to .
`` if i .
'' said mr. collins .
`` were so fortunate as to be able to sing .
i should have great pleasure , i am sure , in obliging the company with an air .
for i consider music as a very innocent diversion .
and perfectly compatible with the profession of a clergyman.. i do not mean however to
assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time to music .
for there are certainly other things to be attended to .
the rector of a parish has much to do.. in the first place .
he must make such an agreement for tythes as may be beneficial to himself and not offensive to his patron .
he must write his own sermons .
and the time that remains will not be too much for his parish duties .
and the care and improvement of his dwelling .
which he can not be excused from making as comfortable as possible .
and i do not think it of light importance that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards every body .
especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment .
i can not acquit him of that duty .
nor could i think well of the man who should omit an occasion
of testifying his respect towards any body connected with the family . ''
and with a bow to mr. darcy .
he concluded his speech .
which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room.. many stared.. many smiled .
but no one looked more amused than mr. bennet himself .
while his wife seriously commended mr. collins for having spoken so sensibly .
and observed in a half-whisper to lady lucas .
that he was a remarkably clever , good kind of young man .
to elizabeth it appeared .
that had her family made an agreement to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening .
it would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit , or finer success .
and happy did she think it for bingley and her sister that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice .
and that his feelings were not of a sort to be
much distressed by the folly which he must have witnessed .
that his two sisters and mr. darcy .
however .
should have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations was bad enough .
and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman .
or the insolent smiles of the ladies , were more intolerable .
the rest of the evening brought her little amusement .
she was teazed by mr. collins .
who continued most perseveringly by her side .
and though he could not prevail with her to dance with him again .
put it out of her power to dance with others .
in vain did she entreat him to stand up with somebody else .
and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room .
he assured her that as to dancing , he was perfectly indifferent to it .
that his chief object was by delicate attentions to recommend himself to her .
and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her the whole evening .
there was no arguing upon such a project .
she owed her greatest relief to her friend miss lucas .
who often joined them , and good-naturedly engaged mr. collins 's conversation to herself .
she was at least free from the offence of mr. darcy 's farther notice .
though often standing within a very short distance of her .
quite disengaged , he never came near enough to speak .
she felt it to be the probable consequence of her allusions to mr. wickham , and rejoiced in it .
the longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart .
and by a manoeuvre of mrs. bennet had to wait for their
carriages a quarter of an hour after every body else was gone .
which gave them time to see how heartily they were wished away by some of the family .
mrs. hurst and her sister scarcely opened their mouths except to complain of fatigue .
and were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves .
they repulsed every attempt of mrs. bennet at conversation .
and by so doing .
threw a languor over the whole party .
which was very little relieved by the long speeches of mr. collins .
who was complimenting mr. bingley and his sisters on the elegance of their entertainment .
and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests .
darcy said nothing at all .
mr. bennet , in equal silence , was enjoying the scene .
mr. bingley and jane were standing together .
a little detached from the rest , and talked only to each other .
elizabeth preserved as steady a silence as either mrs. hurst or miss bingley .
and even lydia was too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of `` lord .
how tired i am ! ''
accompanied by a violent yawn .
when at length they arose to take leave .
mrs. bennet was most pressingly civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at longbourn .
and addressed herself particularly to mr. bingley .
to assure him how happy he would make them .
by eating a family dinner with them at any time , without the ceremony of a formal invitation .
bingley was all grateful pleasure .
and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on her .
after his return from london , whither he was obliged to go the next day for a short time .
mrs. bennet was perfectly satisfied .
and quitted the house under the delightful persuasion that .
allowing for the necessary preparations of settlements .
new carriages and wedding clothes .
she should undoubtedly see her daughter settled at netherfield , in the course of three or four months .
of having another daughter married to mr. collins .
she thought with equal certainty , and with considerable , though not equal , pleasure .
elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children .
and though the man and the match were quite good enough for her .
the worth of each was eclipsed by mr. bingley and netherfield .
the next day opened a new scene at longbourn .
mr. collins made his declaration in form .
having resolved to do it without loss of time .
as his leave of absence extended only to the following saturday .
and having no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the moment .
he set about it in a very orderly manner .
with all the observances which he supposed a regular part of the business .
on finding mrs. bennet .
elizabeth .
and one of the younger girls together .
soon after breakfast .
he addressed the mother in these words .
`` may i hope .
madam .
for your interest with your fair daughter elizabeth .
when i solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the course of this morning ? ''
before elizabeth had time for any thing but a blush of surprise .
mrs. bennet instantly answered , `` oh dear ! .
yes .
certainly.. i am sure lizzy will be very happy .
i am sure she can have no objection.. come , kitty , i want you up stairs . ''
and gathering her work together .
she was hastening away .
when elizabeth called out .
`` dear ma'am .
do not go.. i beg you will not go.. mr. collins must excuse me..
he can have nothing to say to me that any body need not hear .
i am going away myself . ''
`` no , no , nonsense , lizzy.. i desire you will stay where you are . `` .
and upon elizabeth 's seeming really .
with vexed and embarrassed looks .
about to escape , she added , `` lizzy , i insist upon your staying and hearing mr .
collins . ''
elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction .
and a moment's consideration making her also sensible that it would be
wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible .
she sat down again .
and tried to conceal by incessant employment the feelings which were divided between distress and diversion .
mrs. bennet and kitty walked off , and as soon as they were gone mr. collins began .
`` believe me .
my dear miss elizabeth .
that your modesty , so far from doing you any disservice , rather adds to your other perfections .
you would have been less amiable in my eyes had there not been this little unwillingness .
but allow me to assure you that i have your respected mother 's permission for this address .
you can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse , however your natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble .
my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken .
almost as soon as i entered the house i singled you out as the companion of my future life .
but before i am run away with by my feelings on this subject .
perhaps it will be advisable for me to state my reasons for marrying .
and moreover for coming into hertfordshire with the design of selecting a wife , as i certainly did . ''
the idea of mr. collins .
with all his solemn composure .
being run away with by his feelings .
made elizabeth so near laughing that she could not use the
short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him farther .
and he continued : `` my reasons for marrying are .
first .
that i think it a right thing for every clergyman in easy circumstances
( like myself ) to set the example of matrimony in his parish .
secondly , that i am convinced it will add very greatly to my happiness .
and thirdly .
which perhaps i ought to have mentioned earlier .
that it is the particular advice and recommendation of the very
noble lady whom i have the honour of calling patroness .
twice has she condescended to give me her opinion ( unasked too ! )
on this subject .
and it was but the very saturday night before i left hunsford .
between our pools at quadrille .
while mrs. jenkinson was arranging miss de bourgh 's foot-stool , that she said , 'mr .
collins , you must marry .
a clergyman like you must marry.. chuse properly , chuse a gentlewoman for my sake .
and for your own .
let her be an active .
useful sort of person .
not brought up high , but able to make a small income go a good way .
this is my advice .
find such a woman as soon as you can .
bring her to hunsford , and i will visit her . '
allow me .
by the way .
to observe .
my fair cousin .
that i do not reckon the notice and kindness of lady catherine de
bourgh as among the least of the advantages in my power to offer .
you will find her manners beyond any thing i can describe .
and your wit and vivacity i think must be acceptable to her .
especially when tempered with the silence and respect which her rank will inevitably excite .
thus much for my general intention in favour of matrimony .
it remains to be told why my views were directed to longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood .
where i assure you there are many amiable young women .
but the fact is .
that being .
as i am .
to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured father .
( who .
however .
may live many years longer .
) i could not satisfy myself without resolving to chuse a wife from among his daughters .
that the loss to them might be as little as possible , when the melancholy event takes place .
which , however , as i have already said , may not be for several years .
this has been my motive .
my fair cousin , and i flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem .
and now nothing remains for me but to assure you in
the most animated language of the violence of my affection .
to fortune i am perfectly indifferent .
and shall make no demand of that nature on your father .
since i am well aware that it could not be complied with .
and that one thousand pounds in the 4 per cents .
which will not be yours till after your mother's decease , is all that you may ever be entitled to .
on that head , therefore , i shall be uniformly silent .
and you may assure yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married . ''
it was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now .
`` you are too hasty , sir , '' she cried .
`` you forget that i have made no answer .
let me do it without farther loss of time .
accept my thanks for the compliment you are paying me .
i am very sensible of the honour of your proposals .
but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than decline them . ''
`` i am not now to learn .
'' replied mr. collins .
with a formal wave of the hand .
`` that it is usual with young ladies to reject the
addresses of the man whom they secretly mean to accept .
when he first applies for their favour .
and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second or even a third time .
i am therefore by no means discouraged by what you have just said .
and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long . ''
`` upon my word .
sir , '' cried elizabeth , `` your hope is rather an extraordinary one after my declaration .
i do assure you that i am not one of those young ladies ( if such young ladies there are
) who are so daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second time .
i am perfectly serious in my refusal.. you could not make me happy .
and i am convinced that i am the last woman in the world who would make you so.. nay .
were your friend lady catherine to know me .
i am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the situation . ''
`` were it certain that lady catherine would think so , '' said mr. collins very gravely .
`` but i can not imagine that her ladyship would at all disapprove of you .
and you may be certain that when i have the honour of seeing
her again i shall speak in the highest terms of your modesty .
economy , and other amiable qualifications . ''
`` indeed , mr. collins , all praise of me will be unnecessary .
you must give me leave to judge for myself , and pay me the compliment of believing what i say .
i wish you very happy and very rich .
and by refusing your hand , do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise .
in making me the offer .
you must have satisfied the delicacy of your feelings with regard to my family .
and may take possession of longbourn estate whenever it falls , without any self-reproach .
this matter may be considered , therefore , as finally settled . ''
and rising as she thus spoke .
she would have quitted the room .
had not mr. collins thus addressed her .
`` when i do myself the honour of speaking to you next on this subject
i shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given me .
though i am far from accusing you of cruelty at present .
because i know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on the first application .
and perhaps you have even now said as much to encourage my suit
as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the female character . ''
`` really , mr. collins , '' cried elizabeth with some warmth , `` you puzzle me exceedingly .
if what i have hitherto said can appear to you in the form of encouragement .
i know not how to express my refusal in such a
way as may convince you of its being one . ''
`` you must give me leave to flatter myself .
my dear cousin , that your refusal of my addresses is merely words of course .
my reasons for believing it are briefly these : .
it does not appear to me that my hand is unworthy your acceptance .
or that the establishment i can offer would be any other than highly desirable .
my situation in life .
my connections with the family of de bourgh .
and my relationship to your own , are circumstances highly in my favour .
and you should take it into farther consideration that in spite of your manifold attractions .
it is by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you .
your portion is unhappily so small that it will in all
likelihood undo the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications .
as i must therefore conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me .
i shall chuse to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by suspense .
according to the usual practice of elegant females . ''
`` i do assure you .
sir , that i have no pretension whatever to that kind of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man .
i would rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere .
i thank you again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals .
but to accept them is absolutely impossible .
my feelings in every respect forbid it .
can i speak plainer ?
do not consider me now as an elegant female intending to plague you .
but as a rational creature speaking the truth from her heart . ''
`` you are uniformly charming ! ''
cried he , with an air of awkward gallantry .
`` and i am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express authority of both your excellent parents .
my proposals will not fail of being acceptable . ''
to such perseverance in wilful self-deception elizabeth would make no reply , and immediately and in silence withdrew .
determined .
if he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering encouragement .
to apply to her father .
whose negative might be uttered in such a manner as must be decisive .
and whose behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female .
mr. collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his successful love .
for mrs. bennet .
having dawdled about in the vestibule to watch for the end of the conference .
no sooner saw elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase .
than she entered the breakfast-room .
and congratulated both him and herself in warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection .
mr. collins received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure .
and then proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview .
with the result of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied .
since the refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally
flow from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character .
this information .
however .
startled mrs. bennet.. she would have been glad to be equally satisfied that
her daughter had meant to encourage him by protesting against his proposals .
but she dared not to believe it , and could not help saying so .
`` but depend upon it .
mr. collins , '' she added , `` that lizzy shall be brought to reason .
i will speak to her about it myself directly .
she is a very headstrong foolish girl , and does not know her own interest .
but i will make her know it . ''
`` pardon me for interrupting you , madam , '' cried mr. collins .
`` but if she is really headstrong and foolish .
i know not whether she would altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation .
who naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state .
if therefore she actually persists in rejecting my suit .
perhaps it were better not to force her into accepting me .
because if liable to such defects of temper , she could not contribute much to my felicity . ''
`` sir , you quite misunderstand me , '' said mrs. bennet , alarmed .
`` lizzy is only headstrong in such matters as these .
in every thing else she is as good natured a girl as ever lived .
i will go directly to mr. bennet .
and we shall very soon settle it with her , i am sure . ''
she would not give him time to reply .
but hurrying instantly to her husband , called out as she entered the library , `` oh !
mr. bennet , you are wanted immediately .
we are all in an uproar .
you must come and make lizzy marry mr. collins .
for she vows she will not have him .
and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and not have her . ''
mr. bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered .
and fixed them on her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by her communication .
`` i have not the pleasure of understanding you , '' said he , when she had finished her speech .
`` of what are you talking ? ''
`` of mr. collins and lizzy .
lizzy declares she will not have mr. collins .
and mr. collins begins to say that he will not have lizzy . ''
`` and what am i to do on the occasion ? .
it seems an hopeless business . ''
`` speak to lizzy about it yourself .
tell her that you insist upon her marrying him . ''
`` let her be called down .
she shall hear my opinion . ''
mrs. bennet rang the bell , and miss elizabeth was summoned to the library .
`` come here , child , '' cried her father as she appeared .
`` i have sent for you on an affair of importance .
i understand that mr. collins has made you an offer of marriage .
is it true ? ''
elizabeth replied that it was .
`` very well .
and this offer of marriage you have refused ? ''
`` i have , sir . ''
`` very well .
we now come to the point .
your mother insists upon your accepting it .
is not it so , mrs .
bennet ? ''
`` yes , or i will never see her again . ''
`` an unhappy alternative is before you , elizabeth .
from this day you must be a stranger to one of your parents.. your
mother will never see you again if you do not marry mr. collins .
and i will never see you again if you do . ''
elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning .
but mrs. bennet .
who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the affair as she wished , was excessively disappointed .
`` what do you mean , mr. bennet , by talking in this way ?
you promised me to insist upon her marrying him . ''
`` my dear , '' replied her husband , `` i have two small favours to request .
first , that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the present occasion .
and secondly , of my room .
i shall be glad to have the library to myself as soon as may be . ''
not yet .
however , in spite of her disappointment in her husband , did mrs. bennet give up the point .
she talked to elizabeth again and again .
coaxed and threatened her by turns .
she endeavoured to secure jane in her interest .
but jane with all possible mildness declined interfering.. and elizabeth sometimes with
real earnestness and sometimes with playful gaiety replied to her attacks .
though her manner varied however , her determination never did .
mr. collins , meanwhile , was meditating in solitude on what had passed .
he thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motive his cousin could refuse him .
and though his pride was hurt , he suffered in no other way .
his regard for her was quite imaginary .
and the possibility of her deserving her mother 's reproach prevented his feeling any regret .
while the family were in this confusion , charlotte lucas came to spend the day with them .
she was met in the vestibule by lydia .
who .
flying to her .
cried in a half whisper .
`` i am glad you are come , for there is such fun here ! .
what do you think has happened this morning ? .
mr. collins has made an offer to lizzy , and she will not have him . ''
charlotte had hardly time to answer .
before they were joined by kitty .
who came to tell the same news .
and no sooner had they entered the breakfast-room .
where mrs. bennet was alone .
than she likewise began on the subject .
calling on miss lucas for her compassion .
and entreating her to persuade her friend lizzy to comply with the wishes of all her family .
`` pray do .
my dear miss lucas .
'' she added in a melancholy tone .
'' for nobody is on my side .
nobody takes part with me , i am cruelly used , nobody feels for my poor nerves . ''
charlotte 's reply was spared by the entrance of jane and elizabeth .
`` aye .
there she comes .
'' continued mrs. bennet .
`` looking as unconcerned as may be .
and caring no more for us than if we were at york .
provided she can have her own way.. but i tell you what .
miss lizzy .
if you take it into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way .
you will never get a husband at all .
and i am sure i do not know who is to maintain you
when your father is dead.. i shall not be able to keep you .
and so i warn you.. i have done with you from this very day.. i told you in the library .
you know .
that i should never speak to you again , and you will find me as good as my word .
i have no pleasure in talking to undutiful children.. not that
i have much pleasure indeed in talking to any body .
people who suffer as i do from nervous complaints can have no great inclination for talking .
nobody can tell what i suffer ! .
but it is always so .
those who do not complain are never pitied . ''
her daughters listened in silence to this effusion .
sensible that any attempt to reason with or sooth her would only increase the irritation .
she talked on , therefore .
without interruption from any of them till they were joined by mr. collins .
who entered with an air more stately than usual .
and on perceiving whom .
she said to the girls .
`` now .
i do insist upon it .
that you .
all of you , hold your tongues , and let mr. collins and me have a little conversation together . ''
elizabeth passed quietly out of the room .
jane and kitty followed , but lydia stood her ground , determined to hear all she could .
and charlotte .
detained first by the civility of mr. collins .
whose inquiries after herself and all her family were very minute .
and then by a little curiosity , satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending not to hear .
in a doleful voice mrs. bennet thus began the projected conversation.. `` oh !
mr .
collins ! `` .
`` my dear madam , '' replied he , `` let us be for ever silent on this point .
far be it from me .
'' he presently continued in a voice that marked his displeasure , `` to resent the behaviour of your daughter .
resignation to inevitable evils is the duty of us all .
the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so fortunate as i have been in early preferment .
and i trust i am resigned .
perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my
positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand .
for i have often observed that resignation is never so perfect as when
the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation .
you will not .
i hope .
consider me as shewing any disrespect to your family .
my dear madam .
by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your daughter 's favour .
without having paid yourself and mr. bennet the compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf .
my conduct may i fear be objectionable in having accepted my
dismission from your daughter 's lips instead of your own .
but we are all liable to error .
i have certainly meant well through the whole affair .
my object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself .
with due consideration for the advantage of all your family .
and if my manner has been at all reprehensible , i here beg leave to apologise . ''
the discussion of mr. collins 's offer was now nearly at an end .
and elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily attending it .
and occasionally from some peevish allusion of her mother .
as for the gentleman himself .
his feelings were chiefly expressed .
not by embarrassment or dejection .
or by trying to avoid her , but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence .
he scarcely ever spoke to her .
and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of himself .
were transferred for the rest of the day to miss lucas .
whose civility in listening to him , was a seasonable relief to them all , and especially to her friend .
the morrow produced no abatement of mrs. bennet 's ill humour or ill health .
mr. collins was also in the same state of angry pride .
elizabeth had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit .
but his plan did not appear in the least affected by it .
he was always to have gone on saturday , and to saturday he still meant to stay .
after breakfast .
the girls walked to meryton to inquire if mr. wickham were returned .
and to lament over his absence from the netherfield ball .
he joined them on their entering the town and attended them to their aunt 's .
where his regret and vexation .
and the concern of every body was well talked over.. to elizabeth .
however , he voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of his absence had been self imposed .
`` i found .
'' said he .
`` as the time drew near .
that i had better not meet mr. darcy.. that to be in the same room .
the same party with him for so many hours together .
might be more than i could bear , and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself . ''
she highly approved his forbearance .
and they had leisure for a full discussion of it .
and for all the commendation which they civilly bestowed on each other .
as wickham and another officer walked back with them to longbourn .
and during the walk , he particularly attended to her .
his accompanying them was a double advantage .
she felt all the compliment it offered to herself .
and it was most acceptable as an occasion of introducing him to her father and mother .
soon after their return , a letter was delivered to miss bennet .
it came from netherfield , and was opened immediately .
the envelope contained a sheet of elegant .
little , hot pressed paper , well covered with a lady's fair , flowing hand .
and elizabeth saw her sister 's countenance change as she read it .
and saw her dwelling intently on some particular passages .
jane recollected herself soon .
and putting the letter away , tried to join with her usual cheerfulness in the general conversation .
but elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off her attention even from wickham .
and no sooner had he and his companion taken leave .
than a glance from jane invited her to follow her up stairs .
when they had gained their own room .
jane taking out the letter , said , `` this is from caroline bingley .
what it contains , has surprised me a good deal .
the whole party have left netherfield by this time , and are on their way to town .
and without any intention of coming back again .
you shall hear what she says . ''
she then read the first sentence aloud .
which comprised the information of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly .
and of their meaning to dine that day in grosvenor street , where mr. hurst had a house .
the next was in these words .
`` i do not pretend to regret any thing i shall leave in hertfordshire .
except your society , my dearest friend .
but we will hope at some future period .
to enjoy many returns of the delightful intercourse we have known .
and in the mean while may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence .
i depend on you for that . ''
to these high flown expressions , elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust .
and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her , she saw nothing in it really to lament .
it was not to be supposed that their absence from netherfield would prevent mr. bingley 's being there .
and as to the loss of their society .
she was persuaded that jane must soon cease to regard it , in the enjoyment of his .
`` it is unlucky .
'' said she .
after a short pause .
`` that you should not be able to see your friends before they leave the country .
but may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which miss bingley looks forward .
may arrive earlier than she is aware .
and that the delightful intercourse you have known as friends .
will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters ? .
mr. bingley will not be detained in london by them . ''
`` caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into hertfordshire this winter .
i will read it to you .
`` when my brother left us yesterday .
he imagined that the business which took him to london .
might be concluded in three or four days .
but as we are certain it can not be so .
and at the same time convinced that when charles gets to town .
he will be in no hurry to leave it again .
we have determined on following him thither .
that he may not be obliged to spend his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel .
many of my acquaintance are already there for the winter .
i wish i could hear that you .
my dearest friend , had any intention of making one in the croud , but of that i despair .
i sincerely hope your christmas in hertfordshire may abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings .
and that your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three .
of whom we shall deprive you . ''
`` it is evident by this .
'' added jane , `` that he comes back no more this winter . ''
`` it is only evident that miss bingley does not mean he should . ''
`` why will you think so ?
it must be his own doing.. he is his own master .
but you do not know all .
i will read you the passage which particularly hurts me .
i will have no reserves from you . ''
`` mr. darcy is impatient to see his sister .
and to confess the truth , we are scarcely less eager to meet her again .
i really do not think georgiana darcy has her equal for beauty , elegance , and accomplishments .
and the affection she inspires in louisa and myself .
is heightened into something still more interesting .
from the hope we dare to entertain of her being hereafter our sister .
i do not know whether i ever before mentioned to you my feelings on this subject .
but i will not leave the country without confiding them , and i trust you will not esteem them unreasonable .
my brother admires her greatly already .
he will have frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing .
her relations all wish the connection as much as his own .
and a sister's partiality is not misleading me .
i think , when i call charles most capable of engaging any woman 's heart .
with all these circumstances to favour an attachment and nothing to prevent it .
am i wrong .
my dearest jane , in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so many ? ''
`` what think you of this sentence , my dear lizzy ? `` .
said jane as she finished it .
`` is it not clear enough ? .
does it not expressly declare that caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister .
that she is perfectly convinced of her brother 's indifference .
and that if she suspects the nature of my feelings for him , she means ( most kindly ! )
to put me on my guard ?
can there be any other opinion on the subject ? ''
`` yes , there can .
for mine is totally different.. will you hear it ? ''
`` most willingly . ''
`` you shall have it in few words .
miss bingley sees that her brother is in love with you , and wants him to marry miss darcy .
she follows him to town in the hope of keeping him there .
and tries to persuade you that he does not care about you . ''
jane shook her head .
`` indeed .
jane , you ought to believe me.. no one who has ever seen you together , can doubt his affection .
miss bingley i am sure can not .
she is not such a simpleton .
could she have seen half as much love in mr. darcy for herself .
she would have ordered her wedding clothes .
but the case is this .
we are not rich enough , or grand enough for them .
and she is the more anxious to get miss darcy for her brother .
from the notion that when there has been one intermarriage , she may have less trouble in achieving a second .
in which there is certainly some ingenuity .
and i dare say it would succeed , if miss de bourgh were out of the way .
but .
my dearest jane .
you can not seriously imagine that because miss bingley tells you her brother greatly admires miss darcy .
he is in the smallest degree less sensible of your merit than when he took leave of you on tuesday .
or that it will be in her power to persuade him that instead of being in love with you .
he is very much in love with her friend . ''
`` if we thought alike of miss bingley .
'' replied jane , `` your representation of all this , might make me quite easy .
but i know the foundation is unjust .
caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving any one .
and all that i can hope in this case is , that she is deceived herself . ''
`` that is right.. you could not have started a more happy idea .
since you will not take comfort in mine .
believe her to be deceived by all means .
you have now done your duty by her , and must fret no longer . ''
`` but .
my dear sister .
can i be happy .
even supposing the best .
in accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry elsewhere ? ''
`` you must decide for yourself .
'' said elizabeth .
`` and if upon mature deliberation .
you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is
more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife .
i advise you by all means to refuse him . ''
`` how can you talk so ? `` .
said jane faintly smiling , .
`` you must know that though i should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation , i could not hesitate . ''
`` i did not think you would.. and that being the case .
i can not consider your situation with much compassion . ''
`` but if he returns no more this winter , my choice will never be required .
a thousand things may arise in six months ! ''
the idea of his returning no more elizabeth treated with the utmost contempt .
it appeared to her merely the suggestion of caroline's interested wishes .
and she could not for a moment suppose that those wishes .
however openly or artfully spoken , could influence a young man so totally independent of every one .
she represented to her sister as forcibly as possible what she felt on the subject .
and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect .
jane 's temper was not desponding .
and she was gradually led to hope .
though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope .
that bingley would return to netherfield and answer every wish of her heart .
they agreed that mrs. bennet should only hear of the departure of the family .
without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman 's conduct .
but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern .
and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen to go away .
just as they were all getting so intimate together .
after lamenting it however at some length .
she had the consolation of thinking that mr. bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at longbourn .
and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration that .
though he had been invited only to a family dinner , she would take care to have two full courses .
the bennets were engaged to dine with the lucases .
and again during the chief of the day , was miss lucas so kind as to listen to mr. collins .
elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her .
`` it keeps him in good humour .
'' said she , `` and i am more obliged to you than i can express . ''
charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful .
and that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time .
this was very amiable .
but charlotte 's kindness extended farther than elizabeth had any conception of.. its object was nothing less .
than to secure her from any return of mr. collins 's addresses , by engaging them towards herself .
such was miss lucas 's scheme .
and appearances were so favourable that when they parted at night .
she would have felt almost sure of success if he had not been to leave hertfordshire so very soon .
but here .
she did injustice to the fire and independence of his character .
for it led him to escape out of longbourn house the next morning with admirable slyness .
and hasten to lucas lodge to throw himself at her feet .
he was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins .
from a conviction that if they saw him depart .
they could not fail to conjecture his design .
and he was not willing to have the attempt known till its success could be known likewise .
for though feeling almost secure .
and with reason , for charlotte had been tolerably encouraging , he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of wednesday .
his reception however was of the most flattering kind .
miss lucas perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house .
and instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane .
but little had she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there .
in as short a time as mr. collins 's long speeches would allow .
every thing was settled between them to the satisfaction of both .
and as they entered the house .
he earnestly entreated her to name the day that was to make him the happiest of men .
and though such a solicitation must be waved for the present .
the lady felt no inclination to trifle with his happiness .
the stupidity with which he was favoured by nature .
must guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its continuance .
and miss lucas .
who accepted him solely from the pure and disinterested desire of an establishment .
cared not how soon that establishment were gained .
sir william and lady lucas were speedily applied to for their consent .
and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity .
mr. collins 's present circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter .
to whom they could give little fortune .
and his prospects of future wealth were exceedingly fair .
lady lucas began directly to calculate with more interest than the matter had ever excited before .
how many years longer mr. bennet was likely to live .
and sir william gave it as his decided opinion .
that whenever mr. collins should be in possession of the longbourn estate .
it would be highly expedient that both he and his wife should make their appearance at st. james 's .
the whole family in short were properly overjoyed on the occasion .
the younger girls formed hopes of coming out a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have done .
and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of charlotte's dying an old maid .
charlotte herself was tolerably composed .
she had gained her point , and had time to consider of it .
her reflections were in general satisfactory .
mr. collins to be sure was neither sensible nor agreeable .
his society was irksome , and his attachment to her must be imaginary .
but still he would be her husband.. without thinking highly either of men or of matrimony .
marriage had always been her object .
it was the only honourable provision for well-educated young women of small fortune .
and however uncertain of giving happiness , must be their pleasantest preservative from want .
this preservative she had now obtained .
and at the age of twenty-seven .
without having ever been handsome , she felt all the good luck of it .
the least agreeable circumstance in the business .
was the surprise it must occasion to elizabeth bennet , whose friendship she valued beyond that of any other person .
elizabeth would wonder , and probably would blame her .
and though her resolution was not to be shaken , her feelings must be hurt by such disapprobation .
she resolved to give her the information herself .
and therefore charged mr. collins when he returned to longbourn to dinner .
to drop no hint of what had passed before any of the family .
a promise of secrecy was of course very dutifully given , but it could not be kept without difficulty .
for the curiosity excited by his long absence .
burst forth in such very direct questions on his return .
as required some ingenuity to evade .
and he was at the same time exercising great self-denial , for he was longing to publish his prosperous love .
as he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of the family .
the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies moved for the night .
and mrs. bennet with great politeness and cordiality said how happy they should be to see him at longbourn again .
whenever his other engagements might allow him to visit them .
`` my dear madam .
'' he replied .
`` this invitation is particularly gratifying , because it is what i have been hoping to receive .
and you may be very certain that i shall avail myself of it as soon as possible . ''
they were all astonished .
and mr. bennet .
who could by no means wish for so speedy a return .
immediately said , `` but is there not danger of lady catherine 's disapprobation here , my good sir ? .
you had better neglect your relations , than run the risk of offending your patroness . ''
`` my dear sir .
'' replied mr. collins .
`` i am particularly obliged to you for this friendly caution .
and you may depend upon my not taking so material a step without her ladyship 's concurrence . ''
`` you can not be too much on your guard .
risk any thing rather than her displeasure .
and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us again .
which i should think exceedingly probable .
stay quietly at home , and be satisfied that we shall take no offence . ''
`` believe me , my dear sir , my gratitude is warmly excited by such affectionate attention .
and depend upon it .
you will speedily receive from me a letter of thanks for this .
as well as for every other mark of your regard during my stay in hertfordshire .
as for my fair cousins .
though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary .
i shall now take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness , not excepting my cousin elizabeth . ''
with proper civilities the ladies then withdrew .
all of them equally surprised to find that he meditated a quick return .
mrs. bennet wished to understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of her younger girls .
and mary might have been prevailed on to accept him .
she rated his abilities much higher than any of the others .
there was a solidity in his reflections which often struck her .
and though by no means so clever as herself .
she thought that if encouraged to read and improve himself by such an example as her 's .
he might become a very agreeable companion .
but on the following morning , every hope of this kind was done away .
miss lucas called soon after breakfast .
and in a private conference with elizabeth related the event of the day before .
the possibility of mr. collins 's fancying himself in love with her
friend had once occurred to elizabeth within the last day or two .
but that charlotte could encourage him .
seemed almost as far from possibility as that she could encourage him herself .
and her astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum .
and she could not help crying out , `` engaged to mr. collins !
my dear charlotte , .
impossible ! ''
the steady countenance which miss lucas had commanded in telling her story .
gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a reproach .
though .
as it was no more than she expected .
she soon regained her composure .
and calmly replied , `` why should you be surprised , my dear eliza ? .
do you think it incredible that mr. collins should be able to procure any woman 's good opinion .
because he was not so happy as to succeed with you ? ''
but elizabeth had now recollected herself .
and making a strong effort for it .
was able to assure her with tolerable firmness that the prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to her .
and that she wished her all imaginable happiness .
`` i see what you are feeling , '' replied charlotte , .
`` you must be surprised , very much surprised , .
so lately as mr. collins was wishing to marry you .
but when you have had time to think it all over .
i hope you will be satisfied with what i have done .
i am not romantic you know .
i never was .
i ask only a comfortable home .
and considering mr. collins's character .
connections .
and situation in life .
i am convinced that my chance of happiness with him is as fair .
as most people can boast on entering the marriage state . ''
elizabeth quietly answered `` undoubtedly . `` .
and after an awkward pause , they returned to the rest of the family .
charlotte did not stay much longer , and elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard .
it was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so unsuitable a match .
the strangeness of mr. collins 's making two offers of marriage within three days .
was nothing in comparison of his being now accepted .
she had always felt that charlotte 's opinion of matrimony was not exactly like her own .
but she could not have supposed it possible that when called into action .
she would have sacrificed every better feeling to worldly advantage .
charlotte the wife of mr. collins , was a most humiliating picture ! .
and to the pang of a friend disgracing herself and sunk in her esteem .
was added the distressing conviction that it was impossible for that
friend to be tolerably happy in the lot she had chosen .
elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters .
reflecting on what she had heard .
and doubting whether she were authorised to mention it .
when sir william lucas himself appeared , sent by his daughter to announce her engagement to the family .
with many compliments to them .
and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the houses , he unfolded the matter , .
to an audience not merely wondering , but incredulous .
for mrs. bennet .
with more perseverance than politeness .
protested he must be entirely mistaken .
and lydia , always unguarded and often uncivil , boisterously exclaimed , `` good lord !
sir william , how can you tell such a story ? .
do not you know that mr. collins wants to marry lizzy ? ''
nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne without anger such treatment .
but sir william 's good breeding carried him through it all .
and though he begged leave to be positive as to the truth of his information .
he listened to all their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy .
elizabeth .
feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant a situation .
now put herself forward to confirm his account , by mentioning her prior knowledge of it from charlotte herself .
and endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters .
by the earnestness of her congratulations to sir william .
in which she was readily joined by jane .
and by making a variety of remarks on the happiness that might be expected from the match .
the excellent character of mr. collins , and the convenient distance of hunsford from london .
mrs. bennet was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while sir william remained .
but no sooner had he left them than her feelings found a rapid vent .
in the first place , she persisted in disbelieving the whole of the matter .
secondly , she was very sure that mr. collins had been taken in .
thirdly , she trusted that they would never be happy together .
and fourthly , that the match might be broken off .
two inferences , however , were plainly deduced from the whole .
one , that elizabeth was the real cause of all the mischief .
and the other , that she herself had been barbarously used by them all .
and on these two points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day .
nothing could console and nothing appease her.. nor did that day wear out her resentment .
a week elapsed before she could see elizabeth without scolding her .
a month passed away before she could speak to sir william or lady lucas without being rude .
and many months were gone before she could at all forgive their daughter .
mr. bennet 's emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion .
and such as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort .
for it gratified him .
he said .
to discover that charlotte lucas .
whom he had been used to think tolerably sensible .
was as foolish as his wife , and more foolish than his daughter !
jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match .
but she said less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness .
nor could elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable .
kitty and lydia were far from envying miss lucas , for mr. collins was only a clergyman .
and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news to spread at meryton .
lady lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to
retort on mrs. bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married .
and she called at longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was .
though mrs. bennet 's sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been enough to drive happiness away .
between elizabeth and charlotte there was a restraint which kept them mutually silent on the subject .
and elizabeth felt persuaded that no real confidence could ever subsist between them again .
her disappointment in charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to her sister .
of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could never be shaken .
and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious .
as bingley had now been gone a week , and nothing was heard of his return .
jane had sent caroline an early answer to her letter .
and was counting the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again .
the promised letter of thanks from mr. collins arrived on tuesday .
addressed to their father .
and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a twelvemonth 's abode in the family might have prompted .
after discharging his conscience on that head .
he proceeded to inform them .
with many rapturous expressions .
of his happiness in having obtained the affection of their amiable neighbour .
miss lucas .
and then explained that it was merely with the view of enjoying her society that he
had been so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at longbourn .
whither he hoped to be able to return on monday fortnight .
for lady catherine .
he added .
so heartily approved his marriage .
that she wished it to take place as soon as possible .
which he trusted would be an unanswerable argument with his amiable charlotte
to name an early day for making him the happiest of men .
mr. collins 's return into hertfordshire was no longer a matter of pleasure to mrs. bennet .
on the contrary she was as much disposed to complain of it as her husband..
it was very strange that he should come to longbourn instead of to lucas lodge .
it was also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome.. she hated having
visitors in the house while her health was so indifferent .
and lovers were of all people the most disagreeable .
such were the gentle murmurs of mrs. bennet .
and they gave way only to the greater distress of mr. bingley 's continued absence .
neither jane nor elizabeth were comfortable on this subject .
day after day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the report
which shortly prevailed in meryton of his coming no more to netherfield the whole winter .
a report which highly incensed mrs. bennet , and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous falsehood .
even elizabeth began to fear .
not that bingley was indifferent .
but that his sisters would be successful in keeping him away .
unwilling as she was to admit an idea so destructive of jane 's happiness .
and so dishonourable to the stability of her lover , she could not prevent its frequently recurring .
the united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters and of his overpowering friend .
assisted by the attractions of miss darcy and the amusements of london .
might be too much , she feared , for the strength of his attachment .
as for jane , her anxiety under this suspence was , of course , more painful than elizabeth 's .
but whatever she felt she was desirous of concealing .
and between herself and elizabeth , therefore , the subject was never alluded to .
but as no such delicacy restrained her mother .
an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of bingley .
express her impatience for his arrival .
or even require jane to confess that if he did not come back .
she should think herself very ill used .
it needed all jane 's steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable tranquillity .
mr. collins returned most punctually on the monday fortnight .
but his reception at longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on his first introduction .
he was too happy , however , to need much attention .
and luckily for the others , the business of love-making relieved them from a great deal of his company .
the chief of every day was spent by him at lucas lodge .
and he sometimes returned to longbourn only in time to make
an apology for his absence before the family went to bed .
mrs. bennet was really in a most pitiable state .
the very mention of any thing concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill humour .
and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of .
the sight of miss lucas was odious to her .
as her successor in that house , she regarded her with jealous abhorrence .
whenever charlotte came to see them she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession .
and whenever she spoke in a low voice to mr. collins .
was convinced that they were talking of the longbourn estate .
and resolving to turn herself and her daughters out of the house , as soon as mr. bennet were dead .
she complained bitterly of all this to her husband .
`` indeed .
mr. bennet .
'' said she .
`` it is very hard to think that charlotte lucas should ever be mistress of this house .
that i should be forced to make way for her .
and live to see her take my place in it ! ''
`` my dear , do not give way to such gloomy thoughts .
let us hope for better things .
let us flatter ourselves that i may be the survivor . ''
this was not very consoling to mrs. bennet .
and .
therefore .
instead of making any answer .
she went on as before , `` i can not bear to think that they should have all this estate .
if it was not for the entail i should not mind it . ''
`` what should not you mind ? ''
`` i should not mind any thing at all . ''
`` let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such insensibility . ''
`` i never can be thankful , mr. bennet , for any thing about the entail .
how any one could have the conscience to entail away an
estate from one 's own daughters i can not understand .
and all for the sake of mr. collins too ! .
why should he have it more than anybody else ? ''
`` i leave it to yourself to determine , '' said mr. bennet .
end of vol .
i .
[ illustration : a vicarage house . ]
pride and prejudice : a novel .
in three volumes .
by the author of `` sense and sensibility . ''
vol .
ii .
london : printed for t. egerton , military library , whitehall .
1813. pride & prejudice .
miss bingley 's letter arrived , and put an end to doubt .
the very first sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in london for the winter .
and concluded with her brother 's regret at not having had time to
pay his respects to his friends in hertfordshire before he left the country .
hope was over , entirely over .
and when jane could attend to the rest of the letter .
she found little , except the professed affection of the writer , that could give her any comfort .
miss darcy 's praise occupied the chief of it .
her many attractions were again dwelt on .
and caroline boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy .
and ventured to predict the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former letter .
she wrote also with great pleasure of her brother 's being an inmate of mr. darcy 's house .
and mentioned with raptures , some plans of the latter with regard to new furniture .
elizabeth , to whom jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , heard it in silent indignation .
her heart was divided between concern for her sister , and resentment against all the others .
to caroline's assertion of her brother 's being partial to miss darcy she paid no credit .
that he was really fond of jane , she doubted no more than she had ever done .
and much as she had always been disposed to like him .
she could not think without anger .
hardly without contempt .
on that easiness of temper .
that want of proper resolution which now made him the slave of his designing friends .
and led him to sacrifice his own happiness to the caprice of their inclinations .
had his own happiness .
however .
been the only sacrifice .
he might have been allowed to sport with it in what ever manner he thought best .
but her sister 's was involved in it , as she thought he must be sensible himself .
it was a subject , in short , on which reflection would be long indulged , and must be unavailing .
she could think of nothing else .
and yet whether bingley 's regard had really died away , or were suppressed by his friends ' interference .
whether he had been aware of jane 's attachment , or whether it had escaped his observation .
whichever were the case .
though her opinion of him must be materially affected by the difference .
her sister 's situation remained the same , her peace equally wounded .
a day or two passed before jane had courage to speak of her feelings to elizabeth .
but at last on mrs. bennet 's leaving them together .
after a longer irritation than usual about netherfield and its master , she could not help saying , `` oh !
that my dear mother had more command over herself .
she can have no idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him .
but i will not repine .
it can not last long .
he will be forgot , and we shall all be as we were before . ''
elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude , but said nothing .
`` you doubt me , '' cried jane , slightly colouring .
`` indeed you have no reason .
he may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my acquaintance , but that is all .
i have nothing either to hope or fear , and nothing to reproach him with .
thank god !
i have not that pain .
a little time therefore.. i shall certainly try to get the better . ''
with a stronger voice she soon added .
`` i have this comfort immediately .
that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side .
and that it has done no harm to any one but myself . ''
`` my dear jane ! ''
exclaimed elizabeth , `` you are too good .
your sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic .
i do not know what to say to you .
i feel as if i had never done you justice , or loved you as you deserve . ''
miss bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit , and threw back the praise on her sister 's warm affection .
`` nay , '' said elizabeth , `` this is not fair .
you wish to think all the world respectable , and are hurt if i speak ill of any body .
i only want to think you perfect , and you set yourself against it .
do not be afraid of my running into any excess .
of my encroaching on your privilege of universal good will .
you need not .
there are few people whom i really love , and still fewer of whom i think well .
the more i see of the world , the more am i dissatisfied with it .
and every day confirms my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters .
and of the little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of either merit or sense .
i have met with two instances lately .
one i will not mention .
the other is charlotte 's marriage .
it is unaccountable !
in every view it is unaccountable ! ''
`` my dear lizzy , do not give way to such feelings as these .
they will ruin your happiness .
you do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper .
consider mr. collins 's respectability , and charlotte 's prudent , steady character .
remember that she is one of a large family .
that as to fortune , it is a most eligible match .
and be ready to believe .
for every body 's sake , that she may feel something like regard and esteem for our cousin . ''
`` to oblige you .
i would try to believe almost any thing .
but no one else could be benefited by such a belief as this .
for were i persuaded that charlotte had any regard for him .
i should only think worse of her understanding , than i now do of her heart .
my dear jane , mr. collins is a conceited , pompous , narrow-minded , silly man .
you know he is , as well as i do .
and you must feel .
as well as i do .
that the woman who marries him , can not have a proper way of thinking .
you shall not defend her , though it is charlotte lucas .
you shall not .
for the sake of one individual .
change the meaning of principle and integrity .
nor endeavour to persuade yourself or me .
that selfishness is prudence , and insensibility of danger , security for happiness . ''
`` i must think your language too strong in speaking of both .
'' replied jane , `` and i hope you will be convinced of it , by seeing them happy together .
but enough of this .
you alluded to something else .
you mentioned two instances .
i can not misunderstand you .
but i intreat you .
dear lizzy .
not to pain me by thinking that person to blame , and saying your opinion of him is sunk .
we must not be so ready to fancy ourselves intentionally injured .
we must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect .
it is very often nothing but our own vanity that deceives us .
women fancy admiration means more than it does . ''
`` and men take care that they should . ''
`` if it is designedly done , they can not be justified .
but i have no idea of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine . ''
`` i am far from attributing any part of mr. bingley 's conduct to design , '' said elizabeth .
`` but without scheming to do wrong .
or to make others unhappy , there may be error , and there may be misery .
thoughtlessness .
want of attention to other people 's feelings , and want of resolution , will do the business . ''
`` and do you impute it to either of those ? ''
`` yes .
to the last .
but if i go on , i shall displease you by saying what i think of persons you esteem .
stop me whilst you can . ''
`` you persist , then , in supposing his sisters influence him . ''
`` yes , in conjunction with his friend . ''
`` i can not believe it .
why should they try to influence him ?
they can only wish his happiness .
and if he is attached to me , no other woman can secure it . ''
`` your first position is false .
they may wish many things besides his happiness .
they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence .
they may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money .
great connections , and pride . ''
`` beyond a doubt , they do wish him to chuse miss darcy , '' replied jane .
`` but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing .
they have known her much longer than they have known me .
no wonder if they love her better .
but , whatever may be their own wishes , it is very unlikely they should have opposed their brother 's .
what sister would think herself at liberty to do it , unless there were something very objectionable ?
if they believed him attached to me , they would not try to part us .
if he were so , they could not succeed .
by supposing such an affection , you make every body acting unnaturally and wrong , and me most unhappy .
do not distress me by the idea .
i am not ashamed of having been mistaken .
or .
at least .
it is slight .
it is nothing in comparison of what i should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters .
let me take it in the best light , in the light in which it may be understood . ''
elizabeth could not oppose such a wish .
and from this time mr. bingley's name was scarcely ever mentioned between them .
mrs. bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no more .
and though a day seldom passed in which elizabeth did not account for it clearly .
there seemed little chance of her ever considering it with less perplexity .
her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what she did not believe herself .
that his attentions to jane had been merely the effect of a common and transient liking .
which ceased when he saw her no more .
but though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time .
she had the same story to repeat every day .
mrs. bennet 's best comfort was , that mr. bingley must be down again in the summer .
mr. bennet treated the matter differently .
`` so , lizzy , '' said he one day , '' your sister is crossed in love i find .
i congratulate her .
next to being married , a girl likes to be crossed in love a little now and then .
it is something to think of , and gives her a sort of distinction among her companions .
when is your turn to come ?
you will hardly bear to be long outdone by jane .
now is your time .
here are officers enough at meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country .
let wickham be your man .
he is a pleasant fellow , and would jilt you creditably . ''
`` thank you , sir , but a less agreeable man would satisfy me .
we must not all expect jane 's good fortune . ''
`` true .
'' said mr. bennet .
`` but it is a comfort to think that .
whatever of that kind may befal you .
you have an affectionate mother who will always make the most of it . ''
mr. wickham 's society was of material service in dispelling the gloom .
which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the longbourn family .
they saw him often , and to his other recommendations was now added that of general unreserve .
the whole of what elizabeth had already heard .
his claims on mr. darcy .
and all that he had suffered from him , was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed .
and every body was pleased to think how much they had always
disliked mr. darcy before they had known any thing of the matter .
miss bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating circumstances in the case .
unknown to the society of hertfordshire .
her mild and steady candour always pleaded for allowances , and urged the possibility of mistakes .
but by everybody else mr. darcy was condemned as the worst of men .
after a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity .
mr. collins was called from his amiable charlotte by the arrival of saturday .
the pain of separation .
however .
might be alleviated on his side .
by preparations for the reception of his bride .
as he had reason to hope .
that shortly after his next return into hertfordshire .
the day would be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men .
he took leave of his relations at longbourn with as much solemnity as before .
wished his fair cousins health and happiness again , and promised their father another letter of thanks .
on the following monday .
mrs. bennet had the pleasure of receiving her brother and his wife .
who came as usual to spend the christmas at longbourn .
mr. gardiner was a sensible .
gentleman-like man , greatly superior to his sister , as well by nature as education .
the netherfield ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by trade .
and within view of his own warehouses , could have been so well bred and agreeable .
mrs. gardiner .
who was several years younger than mrs. bennet and mrs. philips .
was an amiable , intelligent , elegant woman , and a great favourite with all her longbourn nieces .
between the two eldest and herself especially , there subsisted a very particular regard .
they had frequently been staying with her in town .
the first part of mrs. gardiner 's business on her arrival .
was to distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions .
when this was done , she had a less active part to play .
it became her turn to listen .
mrs. bennet had many grievances to relate , and much to complain of .
they had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister .
two of her girls had been on the point of marriage , and after all there was nothing in it .
`` i do not blame jane .
'' she continued , `` for jane would have got mr. bingley , if she could .
but , lizzy !
oh , sister !
it is very hard to think that she might have been mr. collins 's wife by this time .
had not it been for her own perverseness .
he made her an offer in this very room , and she refused him .
the consequence of it is .
that lady lucas will have a daughter married before i have .
and that longbourn estate is just as much entailed as ever .
the lucases are very artful people indeed , sister .
they are all for what they can get .
i am sorry to say it of them , but so it is .
it makes me very nervous and poorly .
to be thwarted so in my own family , and to have neighbours who think of themselves before anybody else .
however .
your coming just at this time is the greatest of comforts .
and i am very glad to hear what you tell us , of long sleeves . ''
mrs. gardiner .
to whom the chief of this news had been given before .
in the course of jane and elizabeth 's correspondence with her .
made her sister a slight answer , and in compassion to her nieces turned the conversation .
when alone with elizabeth afterwards , she spoke more on the subject .
`` it seems likely to have been a desirable match for jane , '' said she .
`` i am sorry it went off .
but these things happen so often !
a young man .
such as you describe mr. bingley .
so easily falls in love with a pretty girl for a few weeks .
and when accident separates them , so easily forgets her , that these sort of inconstancies are very frequent . ''
`` an excellent consolation in its way , '' said elizabeth , `` but it will not do for us .
we do not suffer by accident .
it does not often happen that the interference of friends will persuade a
young man of independent fortune to think no more of a girl .
whom he was violently in love with only a few days before . ''
`` but that expression of 'violently in love ' is so hackneyed .
so doubtful , so indefinite , that it gives me very little idea .
it is as often applied to feelings which arise from an half-hour 's acquaintance .
as to a real , strong attachment .
pray , how violent was mr. bingley's love ? ''
`` i never saw a more promising inclination .
he was growing quite inattentive to other people , and wholly engrossed by her .
every time they met , it was more decided and remarkable .
at his own ball he offended two or three young ladies .
by not asking them to dance , and i spoke to him twice myself , without receiving an answer .
could there be finer symptoms ?
is not general incivility the very essence of love ? ''
`` oh , yes ! .
of that kind of love which i suppose him to have felt .
poor jane !
i am sorry for her , because , with her disposition , she may not get over it immediately .
it had better have happened to you , lizzy .
you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner .
but do you think she would be prevailed on to go back with us ?
change of scene might be of service .
and perhaps a little relief from home , may be as useful as anything . ''
elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal , and felt persuaded of her sister 's ready acquiescence .
`` i hope .
'' added mrs. gardiner , `` that no consideration with regard to this young man will influence her .
we live in so different a part of town .
all our connections are so different .
and .
as you well know .
we go out so little .
that it is very improbable they should meet at all , unless he really comes to see her . ''
`` and that is quite impossible .
for he is now in the custody of his friend .
and mr. darcy would no more suffer him to call on jane in such a part of london !
my dear aunt , how could you think of it ?
mr. darcy may perhaps have heard of such a place as gracechurch street .
but he would hardly think a month 's ablution enough to cleanse him from its impurities .
were he once to enter it .
and depend upon it , mr. bingley never stirs without him . ''
`` so much the better .
i hope they will not meet at all .
but does not jane correspond with the sister ?
she will not be able to help calling . ''
`` she will drop the acquaintance entirely . ''
but in spite of the certainty in which elizabeth affected to place this point .
as well as the still more interesting one of bingley 's being withheld from seeing jane .
she felt a solicitude on the subject which convinced her .
on examination , that she did not consider it entirely hopeless .
it was possible .
and sometimes she thought it probable .
that his affection might be re-animated .
and the influence of his friends successfully combated by the more natural influence of jane's attractions .
miss bennet accepted her aunt 's invitation with pleasure .
and the bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the time .
than as she hoped that .
by caroline 's not living in the same house with her brother .
she might occasionally spend a morning with her , without any danger of seeing him .
the gardiners staid a week at longbourn .
and what with the philipses .
the lucases , and the officers , there was not a day without its engagement .
mrs. bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment of her brother and sister .
that they did not once sit down to a family dinner .
when the engagement was for home .
some of the officers always made part of it , of which officers mr. wickham was sure to be one .
and on these occasions .
mrs. gardiner , rendered suspicious by elizabeth's warm commendation of him , narrowly observed them both .
without supposing them .
from what she saw .
to be very seriously in love .
their preference of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy .
and she resolved to speak to elizabeth on the subject before she left hertfordshire .
and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such an attachment .
to mrs. gardiner , wickham had one means of affording pleasure , unconnected with his general powers .
about ten or a dozen years ago .
before her marriage .
she had spent a considerable time in that very part of derbyshire , to which he belonged .
they had , therefore , many acquaintance in common .
and .
though wickham had been little there since the death of darcy 's father .
five years before .
it was yet in his power to give her fresher intelligence of her former friends .
than she had been in the way of procuring .
mrs. gardiner had seen pemberley , and known the late mr. darcy by character perfectly well .
here consequently was an inexhaustible subject of discourse .
in comparing her recollection of pemberley .
with the minute description which wickham could give .
and in bestowing her tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor .
she was delighting both him and herself .
on being made acquainted with the present mr. darcy 's treatment of him .
she tried to remember something of that gentleman 's reputed disposition when quite a lad .
which might agree with it .
and was confident at last .
that she recollected having heard mr. fitzwilliam darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud , ill-natured boy .
mrs. gardiner 's caution to elizabeth was punctually and kindly given
on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone .
after honestly telling her what she thought .
she thus went on : `` you are too sensible a girl .
lizzy , to fall in love merely because you are warned against it .
and , therefore , i am not afraid of speaking openly .
seriously , i would have you be on your guard .
do not involve yourself .
or endeavour to involve him in an affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent .
i have nothing to say against him .
he is a most interesting young man .
and if he had the fortune he ought to have , i should think you could not do better .
but as it is .
you must not let your fancy run away with you .
you have sense , and we all expect you to use it .
your father would depend on your resolution and good conduct , i am sure .
you must not disappoint your father . ''
`` my dear aunt , this is being serious indeed . ''
`` yes , and i hope to engage you to be serious likewise . ''
`` well , then , you need not be under any alarm .
i will take care of myself , and of mr. wickham too .
he shall not be in love with me , if i can prevent it . ''
`` elizabeth , you are not serious now . ''
`` i beg your pardon .
i will try again .
at present i am not in love with mr. wickham .
no , i certainly am not .
but he is , beyond all comparison , the most agreeable man i ever saw .
and if he becomes really attached to me .
i believe it will be better that he should not .
i see the imprudence of it.. oh !
that abominable mr. darcy ! .
my father 's opinion of me does me the greatest honour .
and i should be miserable to forfeit it .
my father , however , is partial to mr. wickham .
in short .
my dear aunt , i should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy .
but since we see every day that where there is affection .
young people are seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune .
from entering into engagements with each other .
how can i promise to be wiser than so many of my fellow creatures if i am tempted .
or how am i even to know that it would be wisdom to resist ?
all that i can promise you , therefore , is not to be in a hurry .
i will not be in a hurry to believe myself his first object .
when i am in company with him , i will not be wishing .
in short , i will do my best . ''
`` perhaps it will be as well , if you discourage his coming here so very often .
at least , you should not remind your mother of inviting him . ''
`` as i did the other day , '' said elizabeth , with a conscious smile .
`` very true , it will be wise in me to refrain from that .
but do not imagine that he is always here so often .
it is on your account that he has been so frequently invited this week .
you know my mother 's ideas as to the necessity of constant company for her friends .
but really , and upon my honour , i will try to do what i think to be wisest .
and now , i hope you are satisfied . ''
her aunt assured her that she was .
and elizabeth having thanked her for the kindness of her hints , they parted .
a wonderful instance of advice being given on such a point , without being resented .
mr. collins returned into hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted by the gardiners and jane .
but as he took up his abode with the lucases , his arrival was no great inconvenience to mrs. bennet .
his marriage was now fast approaching .
and she was at length so far resigned as to think it inevitable .
and even repeatedly to say in an ill-natured tone that she `` wished they might be happy . ''
thursday was to be the wedding day , and on wednesday miss lucas paid her farewell visit .
and when she rose to take leave .
elizabeth .
ashamed of her mother 's ungracious and reluctant good wishes .
and sincerely affected herself , accompanied her out of the room .
as they went down stairs together .
charlotte said , `` i shall depend on hearing from you very often , eliza . ''
`` that you certainly shall . ''
`` and i have another favour to ask .
will you come and see me ? ''
`` we shall often meet , i hope , in hertfordshire . ''
`` i am not likely to leave kent for some time .
promise me , therefore , to come to hunsford . ''
elizabeth could not refuse , though she foresaw little pleasure in the visit .
`` my father and maria are to come to me in march .
'' added charlotte , `` and i hope you will consent to be of the party .
indeed , eliza , you will be as welcome to me as either of them . ''
the wedding took place .
the bride and bridegroom set off for kent from the church door .
and every body had as much to say or to hear on the subject as usual .
elizabeth soon heard from her friend .
and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been .
that it should be equally unreserved was impossible .
elizabeth could never address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over .
and .
though determined not to slacken as a correspondent .
it was for the sake of what had been , rather than what was .
charlotte 's first letters were received with a good deal of eagerness .
there could not but be curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home .
how she would like lady catherine , and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to be .
though .
when the letters were read .
elizabeth felt that charlotte expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen .
she wrote cheerfully , seemed surrounded with comforts , and mentioned nothing which she could not praise .
the house .
furniture .
neighbourhood .
and roads , were all to her taste , and lady catherine 's behaviour was most friendly and obliging .
it was mr. collins 's picture of hunsford and rosings rationally softened .
and elizabeth perceived that she must wait for her own visit there , to know the rest .
jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce their safe arrival in london .
and when she wrote again , elizabeth hoped it would be in her power to say something of the bingleys .
her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience generally is .
jane had been a week in town , without either seeing or hearing from caroline .
she accounted for it .
however , by supposing that her last letter to her friend from longbourn , had by some accident been lost .
`` my aunt .
'' she continued .
`` is going to-morrow into that part of the town .
and i shall take the opportunity of calling in grosvenor-street . ''
she wrote again when the visit was paid , and she had seen miss bingley .
`` i did not think caroline in spirits .
'' were her words .
`` but she was very glad to see me .
and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming to london .
i was right , therefore .
my last letter had never reached her .
i enquired after their brother , of course .
he was well , but so much engaged with mr. darcy , that they scarcely ever saw him .
i found that miss darcy was expected to dinner .
i wish i could see her .
my visit was not long , as caroline and mrs. hurst were going out .
i dare say i shall soon see them here . ''
elizabeth shook her head over this letter .
it convinced her , that accident only could discover to mr. bingley her sister 's being in town .
four weeks passed away , and jane saw nothing of him .
she endeavoured to persuade herself that she did not regret it .
but she could no longer be blind to miss bingley 's inattention .
after waiting at home every morning for a fortnight .
and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her , the visitor did at last appear .
but the shortness of her stay .
and yet more , the alteration of her manner , would allow jane to deceive herself no longer .
the letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister , will prove what she felt .
`` my dearest lizzy will .
i am sure .
be incapable of triumphing in her better judgment .
at my expence , when i confess myself to have been entirely deceived in miss bingley 's regard for me .
but .
my dear sister .
though the event has proved you right .
do not think me obstinate if i still assert .
that , considering what her behaviour was , my confidence was as natural as your suspicion .
i do not at all comprehend her reason for wishing to be intimate with me .
but if the same circumstances were to happen again , i am sure i should be deceived again .
caroline did not return my visit till yesterday .
and not a note , not a line , did i receive in the mean time .
when she did come , it was very evident that she had no pleasure in it .
she made a slight .
formal , apology .
for not calling before .
said not a word of wishing to see me again .
and was in every respect so altered a creature .
that when she went away , i was perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer .
i pity , though i can not help blaming her .
she was very wrong in singling me out as she did .
i can safely say , that every advance to intimacy began on her side .
but i pity her .
because she must feel that she has been acting wrong .
and because i am very sure that anxiety for her brother is the cause of it .
i need not explain myself farther .
and though we know this anxiety to be quite needless .
yet if she feels it , it will easily account for her behaviour to me .
and so deservedly dear as he is to his sister .
whatever anxiety she may feel on his behalf , is natural and amiable .
i can not but wonder .
however .
at her having any such fears now .
because , if he had at all cared about me , we must have met long , long ago .
he knows of my being in town , i am certain , from something she said herself .
and yet it should seem by her manner of talking .
as if she wanted to persuade herself that he is really partial to miss darcy .
i can not understand it .
if i were not afraid of judging harshly .
i should be almost tempted to say , that there is a strong appearance of duplicity in all this .
but i will endeavour to banish every painful thought .
and think only of what will make me happy .
your affection , and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt .
let me hear from you very soon .
miss bingley said something of his never returning to netherfield again .
of giving up the house , but not with any certainty .
we had better not mention it .
i am extremely glad that you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at hunsford .
pray go to see them , with sir william and maria .
i am sure you will be very comfortable there .
`` your 's , & c. '' this letter gave elizabeth some pain .
but her spirits returned as she considered that jane would no longer be duped , by the sister at least .
all expectation from the brother was now absolutely over .
she would not even wish for any renewal of his attentions .
his character sunk on every review of it .
and as a punishment for him .
as well as a possible advantage to jane .
she seriously hoped he might really soon marry mr. darcy 's sister .
as , by wickham 's account , she would make him abundantly regret what he had thrown away .
mrs. gardiner about this time reminded elizabeth of her promise concerning that gentleman , and required information .
and elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to herself .
his apparent partiality had subsided , his attentions were over , he was the admirer of some one else .
elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all .
but she could see it and write of it without material pain .
her heart had been but slightly touched .
and her vanity was satisfied with believing that she would have been his only choice , had fortune permitted it .
the sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most remarkable charm of the young lady .
to whom he was now rendering himself agreeable .
but elizabeth .
less clear-sighted perhaps in his case than in charlotte 's .
did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence .
nothing , on the contrary , could be more natural .
and while able to suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her .
she was ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both .
and could very sincerely wish him happy .
all this was acknowledged to mrs. gardiner .
and after relating the circumstances , she thus went on : .
`` i am now convinced , my dear aunt , that i have never been much in love .
for had i really experienced that pure and elevating passion .
i should at present detest his very name , and wish him all manner of evil .
but my feelings are not only cordial towards him .
they are even impartial towards miss king .
i can not find out that i hate her at all .
or that i am in the least unwilling to think her a very good sort of girl .
there can be no love in all this .
my watchfulness has been effectual .
and though i should certainly be a more interesting object to all my acquaintance .
were i distractedly in love with him , i can not say that i regret my comparative insignificance .
importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly .
kitty and lydia take his defection much more to heart than i do .
they are young in the ways of the world .
and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young men must have something to live on .
as well as the plain . ''
with no greater events than these in the longbourn family .
and otherwise diversified by little beyond the walks to meryton .
sometimes dirty and sometimes cold , did january and february pass away .
march was to take elizabeth to hunsford .
she had not at first thought very seriously of going thither .
but charlotte .
she soon found .
was depending on the plan .
and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure as well as greater certainty .
absence had increased her desire of seeing charlotte again , and weakened her disgust of mr. collins .
there was novelty in the scheme .
and as .
with such a mother and such uncompanionable sisters .
home could not be faultless , a little change was not unwelcome for its own sake .
the journey would moreover give her a peep at jane .
and , in short , as the time drew near , she would have been very sorry for any delay .
every thing , however , went on smoothly , and was finally settled according to charlotte 's first sketch .
she was to accompany sir william and his second daughter .
the improvement of spending a night in london was added in time .
and the plan became perfect as plan could be .
the only pain was in leaving her father .
who would certainly miss her .
and who .
when it came to the point .
so little liked her going .
that he told her to write to him , and almost promised to answer her letter .
the farewell between herself and mr. wickham was perfectly friendly .
on his side even more .
his present pursuit could not make him forget that elizabeth had
been the first to excite and to deserve his attention .
the first to listen and to pity , the first to be admired .
and in his manner of bidding her adieu .
wishing her every enjoyment .
reminding her of what she was to expect in lady catherine de bourgh , and trusting their opinion of her .
their opinion of every body .
would always coincide .
there was a solicitude .
an interest which she felt must ever attach her to him with a most sincere regard .
and she parted from him convinced .
that whether married or single , he must always be her model of the amiable and pleasing .
her fellow-travellers the next day , were not of a kind to make her think him less agreeable .
sir william lucas .
and his daughter maria .
a good humoured girl .
but as empty-headed as himself .
had nothing to say that could be worth hearing .
and were listened to with about as much delight as the rattle of the chaise .
elizabeth loved absurdities , but she had known sir william 's too long .
he could tell her nothing new of the wonders of his presentation and knighthood .
and his civilities were worn out like his information .
it was a journey of only twenty-four miles .
and they began it so early as to be in gracechurch-street by noon .
as they drove to mr. gardiner's door , jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival .
when they entered the passage she was there to welcome them .
and elizabeth , looking earnestly in her face , was pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever .
on the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls .
whose eagerness for their cousin 's appearance would not allow them to wait in the drawing-room .
and whose shyness , as they had not seen her for a twelvemonth , prevented their coming lower .
all was joy and kindness .
the day passed most pleasantly away .
the morning in bustle and shopping , and the evening at one of the theatres .
elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt .
their first subject was her sister .
and she was more grieved than astonished to hear .
in reply to her minute enquiries .
that though jane always struggled to support her spirits , there were periods of dejection .
it was reasonable , however , to hope , that they would not continue long .
mrs. gardiner gave her the particulars also of miss bingley 's visit in gracechurch-street .
and repeated conversations occurring at different times between jane and herself .
which proved that the former had , from her heart , given up the acquaintance .
mrs. gardiner then rallied her niece on wickham 's desertion , and complimented her on bearing it so well .
`` but , my dear elizabeth , '' she added , `` what sort of girl is miss king ?
i should be sorry to think our friend mercenary . ''
`` pray .
my dear aunt , what is the difference in matrimonial affairs , between the mercenary and the prudent motive ?
where does discretion end , and avarice begin ?
last christmas you were afraid of his marrying me , because it would be imprudent .
and now .
because he is trying to get a girl with only ten thousand pounds .
you want to find out that he is mercenary . ''
`` if you will only tell me what sort of girl miss king is .
i shall know what to think . ''
`` she is a very good kind of girl , i believe .
i know no harm of her . ''
`` but he paid her not the smallest attention .
till her grandfather's death made her mistress of this fortune . ''
`` no .
why should he ?
if it was not allowable for him to gain my affections .
because i had no money .
what occasion could there be for making love to a girl whom he did not care about .
and who was equally poor ? ''
`` but there seems indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her , so soon after this event . ''
`` a man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant decorums which other people may observe .
if she does not object to it , why should we ? ''
`` her not objecting , does not justify him .
it only shews her being deficient in something herself .
sense or feeling . ''
`` well , '' cried elizabeth , `` have it as you choose .
he shall be mercenary , and she shall be foolish . ''
`` no , lizzy , that is what i do not choose .
i should be sorry .
you know , to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in derbyshire . ''
`` oh !
if that is all , i have a very poor opinion of young men who live in derbyshire .
and their intimate friends who live in hertfordshire are not much better .
i am sick of them all .
thank heaven !
i am going to-morrow where i shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality .
who has neither manner nor sense to recommend him .
stupid men are the only ones worth knowing , after all . ''
`` take care , lizzy .
that speech savours strongly of disappointment . ''
before they were separated by the conclusion of the play .
she had the unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and
aunt in a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer .
`` we have not quite determined how far it shall carry us .
'' said mrs. gardiner , `` but perhaps to the lakes . ''
no scheme could have been more agreeable to elizabeth .
and her acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful .
`` my dear , dear aunt , '' she rapturously cried , `` what delight !
what felicity !
you give me fresh life and vigour .
adieu to disappointment and spleen .
what are men to rocks and mountains ?
oh !
what hours of transport we shall spend !
and when we do return .
it shall not be like other travellers , without being able to give one accurate idea of any thing .
we will know where we have gone .
we will recollect what we have seen .
lakes , mountains , and rivers , shall not be jumbled together in our imaginations .
nor , when we attempt to describe any particular scene , will we begin quarrelling about its relative situation .
let our first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of travellers . ''
every object in the next day 's journey was new and interesting to elizabeth .
and her spirits were in a state for enjoyment .
for she had seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health .
and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight .
when they left the high road for the lane to hunsford .
every eye was in search of the parsonage , and every turning expected to bring it in view .
the paling of rosings park was their boundary on one side .
elizabeth smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants .
at length the parsonage was discernible .
the garden sloping to the road .
the house standing in it , the green pales and the laurel hedge , every thing declared they were arriving .
mr. collins and charlotte appeared at the door .
and the carriage stopped at the small gate .
which led by a short gravel walk to the house , amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party .
in a moment they were all out of the chaise , rejoicing at the sight of each other .
mrs. collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest pleasure .
and elizabeth was more and more satisfied with coming , when she found herself so affectionately received .
she saw instantly that her cousin 's manners were not altered by his marriage .
his formal civility was just what it had been .
and he detained her some minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his enquiries after all her family .
they were then .
with no other delay than his pointing out the neatness of the entrance , taken into the house .
and as soon as they were in the parlour .
he welcomed them a second time with ostentatious formality to his humble abode .
and punctually repeated all his wife 's offers of refreshment .
elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory .
and she could not help fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room .
its aspect and its furniture .
he addressed himself particularly to her .
as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him .
but though every thing seemed neat and comfortable .
she was not able to gratify him by any sigh of repentance .
and rather looked with wonder at her friend that she could have so cheerful an air .
with such a companion .
when mr. collins said any thing of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed .
which certainly was not unseldom , she involuntarily turned her eye on charlotte .
once or twice she could discern a faint blush .
but in general charlotte wisely did not hear .
after sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in the room .
from the sideboard to the fender .
to give an account of their journey and of all that had happened in london .
mr. collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden .
which was large and well laid out , and to the cultivation of which he attended himself .
to work in his garden was one of his most respectable pleasures .
and elizabeth admired the command of countenance with which charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise .
and owned she encouraged it as much as possible .
here .
leading the way through every walk and cross walk .
and scarcely allowing them an interval to utter the praises he asked for .
every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind .
he could number the fields in every direction .
and could tell how many trees there were in the most distant clump .
but of all the views which his garden .
or which the country .
or the kingdom could boast .
none were to be compared with the prospect of rosings .
afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house .
it was a handsome modern building , well situated on rising ground .
from his garden .
mr. collins would have led them round his two meadows .
but the ladies not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white frost , turned back .
and while sir william accompanied him .
charlotte took her sister and friend over the house .
extremely well pleased , probably , to have the opportunity of shewing it without her husband's help .
it was rather small , but well built and convenient .
and every thing was fitted up and arranged with a neatness
and consistency of which elizabeth gave charlotte all the credit .
when mr. collins could be forgotten .
there was really a great air of comfort throughout .
and by charlotte 's evident enjoyment of it , elizabeth supposed he must be often forgotten .
she had already learnt that lady catherine was still in the country .
it was spoken of again while they were at dinner .
when mr. collins joining in .
observed .
`` yes .
miss elizabeth .
you will have the honour of seeing lady catherine de bourgh on the ensuing sunday at church .
and i need not say you will be delighted with her .
she is all affability and condescension .
and i doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice when service is over .
i have scarcely any hesitation in saying that she will include you and my
sister maria in every invitation with which she honours us during your stay here .
her behaviour to my dear charlotte is charming .
we dine at rosings twice every week , and are never allowed to walk home .
her ladyship 's carriage is regularly ordered for us .
i should say , one of her ladyship 's carriages , for she has several . ''
`` lady catherine is a very respectable .
sensible woman indeed , '' added charlotte , `` and a most attentive neighbour . ''
`` very true , my dear , that is exactly what i say .
she is the sort of woman whom one can not regard with too much deference . ''
the evening was spent chiefly in talking over hertfordshire news , and telling again what had been already written .
and when it closed .
elizabeth in the solitude of her chamber had to meditate upon charlotte 's degree of contentment .
to understand her address in guiding .
and composure in bearing with her husband , and to acknowledge that it was all done very well .
she had also to anticipate how her visit would pass .
the quiet tenor of their usual employments .
the vexatious interruptions of mr. collins , and the gaieties of their intercourse with rosings .
a lively imagination soon settled it all .
about the middle of the next day .
as she was in her room getting ready for a walk .
a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in confusion .
and after listening a moment .
she heard somebody running up stairs in a violent hurry , and calling loudly after her .
she opened the door .
and met maria in the landing place .
who , breathless with agitation , cried out , `` oh , my dear eliza !
pray make haste and come into the dining-room , for there is such a sight to be seen !
i will not tell you what it is .
make haste , and come down this moment . ''
elizabeth asked questions in vain .
maria would tell her nothing more .
and down they ran into the dining-room , which fronted the lane , in quest of this wonder .
it was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the garden gate .
`` and is this all ? ''
cried elizabeth .
`` i expected at least that the pigs were got into the garden .
and here is nothing but lady catherine and her daughter ! ''
`` la !
my dear , '' said maria quite shocked at the mistake , `` it is not lady catherine .
the old lady is mrs. jenkinson , who lives with them .
the other is miss de bourgh .
only look at her .
she is quite a little creature .
who would have thought she could be so thin and small ! ''
`` she is abominably rude to keep charlotte out of doors in all this wind .
why does she not come in ? ''
`` oh !
charlotte says , she hardly ever does .
it is the greatest of favours when miss de bourgh comes in . ''
`` i like her appearance , '' said elizabeth , struck with other ideas .
`` she looks sickly and cross.. yes , she will do for him very well .
she will make him a very proper wife . ''
mr. collins and charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation with the ladies .
and sir william .
to elizabeth 's high diversion .
was stationed in the doorway .
in earnest contemplation of the greatness before him , and constantly bowing whenever miss de bourgh looked that way .
at length there was nothing more to be said .
the ladies drove on , and the others returned into the house .
mr. collins no sooner saw the two girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune .
which charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked to dine at rosings the next day .
mr. collins 's triumph in consequence of this invitation was complete .
the power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering visitors .
and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his wife , was exactly what he had wished for .
and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon .
was such an instance of lady catherine 's condescension as he knew not how to admire enough .
`` i confess .
'' said he .
`` that i should not have been at all surprised by her ladyship 's
asking us on sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at rosings .
i rather expected , from my knowledge of her affability , that it would happen .
but who could have foreseen such an attention as this ?
who could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there (
an invitation moreover including the whole party ) so immediately after your arrival ! ''
`` i am the less surprised at what has happened .
'' replied sir william .
'' from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are .
which my situation in life has allowed me to acquire .
about the court , such instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon . ''
scarcely any thing was talked of the whole day or next morning , but their visit to rosings .
mr. collins was carefully instructing them in what they were to expect .
that the sight of such rooms .
so many servants , and so splendid a dinner might not wholly overpower them .
when the ladies were separating for the toilette .
he said to elizabeth , `` do not make yourself uneasy , my dear cousin , about your apparel .
lady catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us , which becomes herself and daughter .
i would advise you merely to put on whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest .
there is no occasion for any thing more .
lady catherine will not think the worse of you for being simply dressed .
she likes to have the distinction of rank preserved . ''
while they were dressing .
he came two or three times to their different doors .
to recommend their being quick .
as lady catherine very much objected to be kept waiting for her dinner.. such formidable accounts of her ladyship .
and her manner of living .
quite frightened maria lucas .
who had been little used to company .
and she looked forward to her introduction at rosings .
with as much apprehension , as her father had done to his presentation at st. james 's .
as the weather was fine .
they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile across
the park.. every park has its beauty and its prospects .
and elizabeth saw much to be pleased with .
though she could not be in such raptures as mr. collins expected the scene to inspire .
and was but slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the house .
and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally cost sir lewis de bourgh .
when they ascended the steps to the hall .
maria 's alarm was every moment increasing .
and even sir william did not look perfectly calm.. elizabeth 's courage did not fail her .
she had heard nothing of lady catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or miraculous virtue .
and the mere stateliness of money and rank , she thought she could witness without trepidation .
from the entrance hall .
of which mr. collins pointed out .
with a rapturous air .
the fine proportion and finished ornaments .
they followed the servants through an anti-chamber .
to the room where lady catherine .
her daughter , and mrs. jenkinson were sitting.. her ladyship , with great condescension , arose to receive them .
and as mrs. collins had settled it with her husband that the office of introduction should be her 's .
it was performed in a proper manner .
without any of those apologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary .
in spite of having been at st. james 's .
sir william was so completely awed .
by the grandeur surrounding him .
that he had but just courage enough to make a very low bow .
and take his seat without saying a word .
and his daughter .
frightened almost out of her senses .
sat on the edge of her chair , not knowing which way to look .
elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene .
and could observe the three ladies before her composedly.. lady catherine was a tall .
large woman , with strongly-marked features , which might once have been handsome .
her air was not conciliating .
nor was her manner of receiving them , such as to make her visitors forget their inferior rank .
she was not rendered formidable by silence .
but whatever she said .
was spoken in so authoritative a tone .
as marked her self-importance , and brought mr. wickham immediately to elizabeth 's mind .
and from the observation of the day altogether , she believed lady catherine to be exactly what he had represented .
when .
after examining the mother .
in whose countenance and deportment she soon found some resemblance of mr. darcy .
she turned her eyes on the daughter .
she could almost have joined in maria 's astonishment , at her being so thin , and so small .
there was neither in figure nor face , any likeness between the ladies .
miss de bourgh was pale and sickly .
her features , though not plain , were insignificant .
and she spoke very little .
except in a low voice .
to mrs. jenkinson .
in whose appearance there was nothing remarkable .
and who was entirely engaged in listening to what she said .
and placing a screen in the proper direction before her eyes .
after sitting a few minutes .
they were all sent to one of the windows .
to admire the view .
mr. collins attending them to point out its beauties .
and lady catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth looking at in the summer .
the dinner was exceedingly handsome .
and there were all the servants , and all the articles of plate which mr. collins had promised .
and .
as he had likewise foretold .
he took his seat at the bottom of the table .
by her ladyship 's desire .
and looked as if he felt that life could furnish nothing greater.. he carved .
and ate , and praised with delighted alacrity .
and every dish was commended .
first by him .
and then by sir william .
who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son in law said .
in a manner which elizabeth wondered lady catherine could bear .
but lady catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration .
and gave most gracious smiles , especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty to them .
the party did not supply much conversation .
elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an opening .
but she was seated between charlotte and miss de bourgh .
the former of whom was engaged in listening to lady catherine .
and the latter said not a word to her all dinner time .
mrs. jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little miss de bourgh ate .
pressing her to try some other dish , and fearing she were indisposed .
maria thought speaking out of the question , and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire .
when the ladies returned to the drawing-room .
there was little to be done but to hear lady catherine talk .
which she did without any intermission till coffee came in .
delivering her opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner as
proved that she was not used to have her judgment controverted .
she enquired into charlotte 's domestic concerns familiarly and minutely .
and gave her a great deal of advice , as to the management of them all .
told her how every thing ought to be regulated in so small a family as her 's .
and instructed her as to the care of her cows and her poultry .
elizabeth found that nothing was beneath this great lady 's attention .
which could furnish her with an occasion of dictating to others .
in the intervals of her discourse with mrs. collins .
she addressed a variety of questions to maria and elizabeth .
but especially to the latter .
of whose connections she knew the least .
and who she observed to mrs. collins , was a very genteel , pretty kind of girl .
she asked her at different times .
how many sisters she had .
whether they were older or younger than herself .
whether any of them were likely to be married .
whether they were handsome .
where they had been educated .
what carriage her father kept , and what had been her mother 's maiden name ? .
elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her questions .
but answered them very composedly.. lady catherine then observed .
`` your father 's estate is entailed on mr. collins , i think .
for your sake , '' turning to charlotte , `` i am glad of it .
but otherwise i see no occasion for entailing estates from the female line.. it was
not thought necessary in sir lewis de bourgh 's family.. do you play and sing .
miss bennet ? ''
`` a little . ''
`` oh !
then .
some time or other we shall be happy to hear you .
our instrument is a capital one , probably superior to .
.
you shall try it some day.. do your sisters play and sing ? ''
`` one of them does . ''
`` why did not you all learn ? .
you ought all to have learned .
the miss webbs all play .
and their father has not so good an income as your's.. do you draw ? ''
`` no , not at all . ''
`` what , none of you ? ''
`` not one . ''
`` that is very strange .
but i suppose you had no opportunity .
your mother should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters . ''
`` my mother would have had no objection , but my father hates london . ''
`` has your governess left you ? ''
`` we never had any governess . ''
`` no governess !
how was that possible ?
five daughters brought up at home without a governess ! .
i never heard of such a thing .
your mother must have been quite a slave to your education . ''
elizabeth could hardly help smiling , as she assured her that had not been the case .
`` then , who taught you ?
who attended to you ?
without a governess you must have been neglected . ''
`` compared with some families , i believe we were .
but such of us as wished to learn , never wanted the means .
we were always encouraged to read , and had all the masters that were necessary .
those who chose to be idle , certainly might . ''
`` aye , no doubt .
but that is what a governess will prevent .
and if i had known your mother , i should have advised her most strenuously to engage one .
i always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady and regular instruction .
and nobody but a governess can give it .
it is wonderful how many families i have been the means of supplying in that way .
i am always glad to get a young person well placed out .
four nieces of mrs. jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means .
and it was but the other day .
that i recommended another young person .
who was merely accidentally mentioned to me , and the family are quite delighted with her .
mrs. collins , did i tell you of lady metcalfe's calling yesterday to thank me ?
she finds miss pope a treasure .
'lady catherine , ' said she , 'you have given me a treasure . '
are any of your younger sisters out , miss bennet ? ''
`` yes , ma'am , all . ''
`` all ! .
what , all five out at once ?
very odd ! .
and you only the second.. the younger ones out before the elder are married ! .
your younger sisters must be very young ? ''
`` yes , my youngest is not sixteen .
perhaps she is full young to be much in company .
but really .
ma'am .
i think it would be very hard upon younger sisters .
that they should not have their share of society and amusement because the elder may not have the means
or inclination to marry early.. the last born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth .
as the first .
and to be kept back on such a motive ! .
i think it would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind . ''
`` upon my word .
'' said her ladyship .
`` you give your opinion very decidedly for so young a person.. pray , what is your age ? ''
`` with three younger sisters grown up .
'' replied elizabeth smiling , `` your ladyship can hardly expect me to own it . ''
lady catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer .
and elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence .
`` you can not be more than twenty , i am sure , .
therefore you need not conceal your age . ''
`` i am not one and twenty . ''
when the gentlemen had joined them , and tea was over , the card tables were placed .
lady catherine , sir william , and mr. and mrs. collins sat down to quadrille .
and as miss de bourgh chose to play at cassino .
the two girls had the honour of assisting mrs. jenkinson to make up her party .
their table was superlatively stupid .
scarcely a syllable was uttered that did not relate to the game .
except when mrs. jenkinson expressed her fears of miss de bourgh 's being too hot or too cold .
or having too much or too little light .
a great deal more passed at the other table .
lady catherine was generally speaking .
stating the mistakes of the three others , or relating some anecdote of herself .
mr. collins was employed in agreeing to every thing her ladyship said .
thanking her for every fish he won , and apologising if he thought he won too many .
sir william did not say much .
he was storing his memory with anecdotes and noble names .
when lady catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose .
the tables were broke up , the carriage was offered to mrs. collins , gratefully accepted , and immediately ordered .
the party then gathered round the fire to hear lady catherine
determine what weather they were to have on the morrow .
from these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the coach .
and with many speeches of thankfulness on mr. collins 's side .
and as many bows on sir william 's , they departed .
as soon as they had driven from the door .
elizabeth was called on by her cousin .
to give her opinion of all that she had seen at rosings .
which , for charlotte 's sake , she made more favourable than it really was .
but her commendation .
though costing her some trouble .
could by no means satisfy mr. collins .
and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship's praise into his own hands .
sir william staid only a week at hunsford .
but his visit was long enough to convince him of his daughter 's being most comfortably settled .
and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not often met with .
while sir william was with them .
mr. collins devoted his mornings to driving him out in his gig , and shewing him the country .
but when he went away .
the whole family returned to their usual employments .
and elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her cousin by the alteration .
for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was
now passed by him either at work in the garden .
or in reading and writing .
and looking out of window in his own book room , which fronted the road .
the room in which the ladies sat was backwards .
elizabeth at first had rather wondered that charlotte should not prefer the dining-parlour for common use .
it was a better sized room , and had a pleasanter aspect .
but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent reason for what she did .
for mr. collins would undoubtedly have been much less in his own apartment .
had they sat in one equally lively .
and she gave charlotte credit for the arrangement .
from the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane .
and were indebted to mr. collins for the knowledge of what carriages went along .
and how often especially miss de bourgh drove by in her phaeton .
which he never failed coming to inform them of , though it happened almost every day .
she not unfrequently stopped at the parsonage .
and had a few minutes ' conversation with charlotte , but was scarcely ever prevailed on to get out .
very few days passed in which mr. collins did not walk to rosings .
and not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise .
and till elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings to be disposed of .
she could not understand the sacrifice of so many hours .
now and then .
they were honoured with a call from her ladyship .
and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during these visits .
she examined into their employments , looked at their work , and advised them to do it differently .
found fault with the arrangement of the furniture , or detected the housemaid in negligence .
and if she accepted any refreshment .
seemed to do it only for the sake of finding out that
mrs. collins 's joints of meat were too large for her family .
elizabeth soon perceived that though this great lady was not in the commission of the peace for the county .
she was a most active magistrate in her own parish .
the minutest concerns of which were carried to her by mr. collins .
and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be quarrelsome .
discontented or too poor .
she sallied forth into the village to settle their differences .
silence their complaints , and scold them into harmony and plenty .
the entertainment of dining at rosings was repeated about twice a week .
and .
allowing for the loss of sir william .
and there being only one card table in the evening , every such entertainment was the counterpart of the first .
their other engagements were few .
as the style of living of the neighbourhood in general , was beyond the collinses ' reach .
this however was no evil to elizabeth , and upon the whole she spent her time comfortably enough .
there were half hours of pleasant conversation with charlotte .
and the weather was so fine for the time of year .
that she had often great enjoyment out of doors .
her favourite walk .
and where she frequently went while the others were calling on lady catherine .
was along the open grove which edged that side of the park .
where there was a nice sheltered path .
which no one seemed to value but herself .
and where she felt beyond the reach of lady catherine 's curiosity .
in this quiet way , the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away .
easter was approaching .
and the week preceding it .
was to bring an addition to the family at rosings , which in so small a circle must be important .
elizabeth had heard soon after her arrival .
that mr. darcy was expected there in the course of a few weeks .
and though there were not many of her acquaintance whom she did not prefer .
his coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their rosings parties .
and she might be amused in seeing how hopeless miss bingley 's designs on him were .
by his behaviour to his cousin , for whom he was evidently destined by lady catherine .
who talked of his coming with the greatest satisfaction .
spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration .
and seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by miss lucas and herself .
his arrival was soon known at the parsonage .
for mr. collins was walking the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into hunsford lane .
in order to have the earliest assurance of it .
and after making his bow as the carriage turned into the park , hurried home with the great intelligence .
on the following morning he hastened to rosings to pay his respects .
there were two nephews of lady catherine to require them .
for mr. darcy had brought with him a colonel fitzwilliam , the younger son of his uncle , lord .
.
and to the great surprise of all the party , when mr. collins returned the gentlemen accompanied him .
charlotte had seen them from her husband 's room .
crossing the road .
and immediately running into the other .
told the girls what an honour they might expect .
adding , `` i may thank you , eliza , for this piece of civility .
mr. darcy would never have come so soon to wait upon me . ''
elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment .
before their approach was announced by the door-bell , and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room .
colonel fitzwilliam .
who led the way .
was about thirty , not handsome , but in person and address most truly the gentleman .
mr. darcy looked just as he had been used to look in hertfordshire .
paid his compliments , with his usual reserve , to mrs. collins .
and whatever might be his feelings towards her friend , met her with every appearance of composure .
elizabeth merely curtseyed to him , without saying a word .
colonel fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the readiness and ease of a well-bred man , and talked very pleasantly .
but his cousin .
after having addressed a slight observation on the house and garden to mrs. collins .
sat for some time without speaking to any body .
at length .
however , his civility was so far awakened as to enquire of elizabeth after the health of her family .
she answered him in the usual way .
and after a moment 's pause , added , `` my eldest sister has been in town these three months .
have you never happened to see her there ? ''
she was perfectly sensible that he never had .
but she wished to see whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the bingleys and jane .
and she thought he looked a little confused as he answered that
he had never been so fortunate as to meet miss bennet .
the subject was pursued no farther , and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away .
colonel fitzwilliam 's manners were very much admired at the parsonage .
and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasure of their engagements at rosings .
it was some days .
however .
before they received any invitation thither .
for while there were visitors in the house , they could not be necessary .
and it was not till easter-day .
almost a week after the gentlemen 's arrival .
that they were honoured by such an attention .
and then they were merely asked on leaving church to come there in the evening .
for the last week they had seen very little of either lady catherine or her daughter .
colonel fitzwilliam had called at the parsonage more than once during the time .
but mr. darcy they had only seen at church .
the invitation was accepted of course .
and at a proper hour they joined the party in lady catherine 's drawing-room .
her ladyship received them civilly .
but it was plain that their company was by no means so acceptable as when she could get nobody else .
and she was .
in fact .
almost engrossed by her nephews .
speaking to them , especially to darcy , much more than to any other person in the room .
colonel fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them .
any thing was a welcome relief to him at rosings .
and mrs. collins 's pretty friend had moreover caught his fancy very much .
he now seated himself by her .
and talked so agreeably of kent and hertfordshire .
of travelling and staying at home .
of new books and music , that elizabeth had never been half so well entertained in that room before .
and they conversed with so much spirit and flow .
as to draw the attention of lady catherine herself , as well as of mr. darcy .
his eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned towards them with a look of curiosity .
and that her ladyship after a while shared the feeling .
was more openly acknowledged .
for she did not scruple to call out , `` what is that you are saying , fitzwilliam ?
what is it you are talking of ?
what are you telling miss bennet ?
let me hear what it is . ''
`` we are speaking of music .
madam , '' said he , when no longer able to avoid a reply .
`` of music !
then pray speak aloud .
it is of all subjects my delight .
i must have my share in the conversation , if you are speaking of music .
there are few people in england .
i suppose , who have more true enjoyment of music than myself , or a better natural taste .
if i had ever learnt , i should have been a great proficient .
and so would anne , if her health had allowed her to apply .
i am confident that she would have performed delightfully .
how does georgiana get on , darcy ? ''
mr. darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister 's proficiency .
`` i am very glad to hear such a good account of her , '' said lady catherine .
`` and pray tell her from me .
that she can not expect to excel , if she does not practise a great deal . ''
`` i assure you , madam , '' he replied , `` that she does not need such advice .
she practises very constantly . ''
`` so much the better .
it can not be done too much .
and when i next write to her , i shall charge her not to neglect it on any account .
i often tell young ladies , that no excellence in music is to be acquired , without constant practice .
i have told miss bennet several times , that she will never play really well , unless she practises more .
and though mrs. collins has no instrument .
she is very welcome .
as i have often told her .
to come to rosings every day , and play on the piano-forte in mrs. jenkinson 's room .
she would be in nobody 's way , you know , in that part of the house . ''
mr. darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt 's ill breeding , and made no answer .
when coffee was over , colonel fitzwilliam reminded elizabeth of having promised to play to him .
and she sat down directly to the instrument .
he drew a chair near her .
lady catherine listened to half a song , and then talked , as before , to her other nephew .
till the latter walked away from her .
and moving with his usual deliberation towards the piano-forte .
stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer's countenance .
elizabeth saw what he was doing .
and at the first convenient pause .
turned to him with an arch smile .
and said .
`` you mean to frighten me , mr. darcy , by coming in all this state to hear me ?
but i will not be alarmed though your sister does play so well .
there is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at the will of others .
my courage always rises with every attempt to intimidate me . ''
`` i shall not say that you are mistaken .
'' he replied , `` because you could not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you .
and i have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know .
that you find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact are not your own . ''
elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself .
and said to colonel fitzwilliam .
`` your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of me .
and teach you not to believe a word i say .
i am particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so well able to expose my real character .
in a part of the world , where i had hoped to pass myself off with some degree of credit .
indeed .
mr. darcy , it is very ungenerous in you to mention all that you knew to my disadvantage in hertfordshire .
and , give me leave to say , very impolitic too .
for it is provoking me to retaliate .
and such things may come out , as will shock your relations to hear . ''
`` i am not afraid of you , '' said he , smilingly .
`` pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of , '' cried colonel fitzwilliam .
`` i should like to know how he behaves among strangers . ''
`` you shall hear then .
but prepare yourself for something very dreadful .
the first time of my ever seeing him in hertfordshire , you must know , was at a ball .
and at this ball , what do you think he did ?
he danced only four dances !
i am sorry to pain you .
but so it was .
he danced only four dances , though gentlemen were scarce .
and , to my certain knowledge , more than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner .
mr. darcy , you can not deny the fact . ''
`` i had not at that time the honour of knowing
any lady in the assembly beyond my own party . ''
`` true .
and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball room .
well , colonel fitzwilliam , what do i play next ?
my fingers wait your orders . ''
`` perhaps .
'' said darcy .
`` i should have judged better .
had i sought an introduction , but i am ill qualified to recommend myself to strangers . ''
`` shall we ask your cousin the reason of this ? ''
said elizabeth , still addressing colonel fitzwilliam .
`` shall we ask him why a man of sense and education .
and who has lived in the world , is ill qualified to recommend himself to strangers ? ''
`` i can answer your question , '' said fitzwilliam , `` without applying to him .
it is because he will not give himself the trouble . ''
`` i certainly have not the talent which some people possess .
'' said darcy , '' of conversing easily with those i have never seen before .
i can not catch their tone of conversation .
or appear interested in their concerns , as i often see done . ''
`` my fingers .
'' said elizabeth .
`` do not move over this instrument in the masterly manner which i see so many women 's do .
they have not the same force or rapidity , and do not produce the same expression .
but then i have always supposed it to be my own fault .
because i would not take the trouble of practising .
it is not that i do not believe my fingers as
capable as any other woman 's of superior execution . ''
darcy smiled and said , `` you are perfectly right .
you have employed your time much better .
no one admitted to the privilege of hearing you , can think any thing wanting .
we neither of us perform to strangers . ''
here they were interrupted by lady catherine , who called out to know what they were talking of .
elizabeth immediately began playing again .
lady catherine approached .
and .
after listening for a few minutes .
said to darcy .
`` miss bennet would not play at all amiss .
if she practised more , and could have the advantage of a london master .
she has a very good notion of fingering , though her taste is not equal to anne 's .
anne would have been a delightful performer , had her health allowed her to learn . ''
elizabeth looked at darcy to see how cordially he assented to his cousin 's praise .
but neither at that moment nor at any other could she discern any symptom of love .
and from the whole of his behaviour to miss de bourgh she derived this comfort for miss bingley .
that he might have been just as likely to marry her , had she been his relation .
lady catherine continued her remarks on elizabeth 's performance , mixing with them many instructions on execution and taste .
elizabeth received them with all the forbearance of civility .
and at the request of the gentlemen remained at the instrument till
her ladyship 's carriage was ready to take them all home .
elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning .
and writing to jane .
while mrs. collins and maria were gone on business into the village .
when she was startled by a ring at the door , the certain signal of a visitor .
as she had heard no carriage .
she thought it not unlikely to be lady catherine .
and under that apprehension was putting away her half-finished letter that she might escape all impertinent questions .
when the door opened .
and to her very great surprise , mr. darcy , and mr. darcy only , entered the room .
he seemed astonished too on finding her alone .
and apologised for his intrusion , by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies to be within .
they then sat down .
and when her enquiries after rosings were made , seemed in danger of sinking into total silence .
it was absolutely necessary .
therefore .
to think of something .
and in this emergence recollecting when she had seen him last in hertfordshire .
and feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty departure .
she observed , `` how very suddenly you all quitted netherfield last november , mr. darcy !
it must have been a most agreeable surprise to mr. bingley to see you all after him so soon .
for , if i recollect right , he went but the day before .
he and his sisters were well , i hope , when you left london . ''
`` perfectly so .
i thank you . ''
she found that she was to receive no other answer .
and .
after a short pause .
added .
`` i think i have understood that mr. bingley has not much idea of ever returning to netherfield again ? ''
`` i have never heard him say so .
but it is probable that he may spend very little of his time there in future .
he has many friends .
and he is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually increasing . ''
`` if he means to be but little at netherfield .
it would be better for the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely .
for then we might possibly get a settled family there .
but perhaps mr. bingley did not take the house so much
for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for his own .
and we must expect him to keep or quit it on the same principle . ''
`` i should not be surprised .
'' said darcy .
`` if he were to give it up , as soon as any eligible purchase offers . ''
elizabeth made no answer .
she was afraid of talking longer of his friend .
and .
having nothing else to say , was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to him .
he took the hint , and soon began with , `` this seems a very comfortable house .
lady catherine , i believe , did a great deal to it when mr. collins first came to hunsford . ''
`` i believe she did .
and i am sure she could not have bestowed her kindness on a more grateful object . ''
`` mr. collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife . ''
`` yes , indeed .
his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one
of the very few sensible women who would have accepted him .
or have made him happy if they had .
my friend has an excellent understanding .
though i am not certain that i consider her marrying mr. collins as the wisest thing she ever did .
she seems perfectly happy .
however , and in a prudential light , it is certainly a very good match for her . ''
`` it must be very agreeable to her to be settled within
so easy a distance of her own family and friends . ''
`` an easy distance do you call it ?
it is nearly fifty miles . ''
`` and what is fifty miles of good road ?
little more than half a day's journey .
yes , i call it a very easy distance . ''
`` i should never have considered the distance as one of the advantages of the match , '' cried elizabeth .
`` i should never have said mrs. collins was settled near her family . ''
`` it is a proof of your own attachment to hertfordshire .
any thing beyond the very neighbourhood of longbourn , i suppose , would appear far . ''
as he spoke there was a sort of smile , which elizabeth fancied she understood .
he must be supposing her to be thinking of jane and netherfield .
and she blushed as she answered .
`` i do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her family .
the far and the near must be relative , and depend on many varying circumstances .
where there is fortune to make the expence of travelling unimportant , distance becomes no evil .
but that is not the case here .
mr. and mrs. collins have a comfortable income , but not such a one as will allow of frequent journeys .
and i am persuaded my friend would not call herself near
her family under less than half the present distance . ''
mr. darcy drew his chair a little towards her .
and said , `` you can not have a right to such very strong local attachment .
you can not have been always at longbourn . ''
elizabeth looked surprised .
the gentleman experienced some change of feeling .
he drew back his chair .
took a newspaper from the table .
and , glancing over it , said , in a colder voice , `` are you pleased with kent ? ''
a short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued , on either side calm and concise .
and soon put an end to by the entrance of charlotte and her sister , just returned from their walk .
the tête-à-tête surprised them .
mr. darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding on miss bennet .
and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying much to any body , went away .
`` what can be the meaning of this ! ''
said charlotte , as soon as he was gone .
`` my dear eliza he must be in love with you .
or he would never have called on us in this familiar way . ''
but when elizabeth told of his silence .
it did not seem very likely , even to charlotte 's wishes , to be the case .
and after various conjectures .
they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from the difficulty of finding any thing to do .
which was the more probable from the time of year .
all field sports were over .
within doors there was lady catherine .
books , and a billiard table , but gentlemen can not be always within doors .
and in the nearness of the parsonage .
or the pleasantness of the walk to it .
or of the people who lived in it .
the two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither almost every day .
they called at various times of the morning .
sometimes separately , sometimes together , and now and then accompanied by their aunt .
it was plain to them all that colonel fitzwilliam came because he had pleasure in their society .
a persuasion which of course recommended him still more .
and elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in being with him .
as well as by his evident admiration of her , of her former favourite george wickham .
and though .
in comparing them .
she saw there was less captivating softness in colonel fitzwilliam 's manners .
she believed he might have the best informed mind .
but why mr. darcy came so often to the parsonage , it was more difficult to understand .
it could not be for society , as he frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening his lips .
and when he did speak , it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice .
a sacrifice to propriety , not a pleasure to himself .
he seldom appeared really animated .
mrs. collins knew not what to make of him .
colonel fitzwilliam 's occasionally laughing at his stupidity .
proved that he was generally different , which her own knowledge of him could not have told her .
and as she would have liked to believe this change the effect of love .
and the object of that love .
her friend eliza .
she sat herself seriously to work to find it out.. she watched him whenever they were at rosings .
and whenever he came to hunsford .
but without much success .
he certainly looked at her friend a great deal , but the expression of that look was disputable .
it was an earnest .
steadfast gaze .
but she often doubted whether there were much admiration in it .
and sometimes it seemed nothing but absence of mind .
she had once or twice suggested to elizabeth the possibility of his being partial to her .
but elizabeth always laughed at the idea .
and mrs. collins did not think it right to press the subject .
from the danger of raising expectations which might only end in disappointment .
for in her opinion it admitted not of a doubt .
that all her friend 's dislike would vanish , if she could suppose him to be in her power .
in her kind schemes for elizabeth , she sometimes planned her marrying colonel fitzwilliam .
he was beyond comparison the pleasantest man .
he certainly admired her , and his situation in life was most eligible .
but .
to counterbalance these advantages .
mr. darcy had considerable patronage in the church , and his cousin could have none at all .
more than once did elizabeth in her ramble within the park .
unexpectedly meet mr. darcy.. she felt all the perverseness of the
mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought .
and to prevent its ever happening again .
took care to inform him at first .
that it was a favourite haunt of hers.. how it could occur a second time therefore was very odd ! .
yet it did , and even a third .
it seemed like wilful ill-nature .
or a voluntary penance .
for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal enquiries and an awkward pause and then away .
but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her .
he never said a great deal , nor did she give herself the trouble of talking or of listening much .
but it struck her in the course of their third rencontre that he was asking some odd unconnected questions .
about her pleasure in being at hunsford .
her love of solitary walks , and her opinion of mr. and mrs. collins 's happiness .
and that in speaking of rosings and her not perfectly understanding the house .
he seemed to expect that whenever she came into kent again she would be staying there too .
his words seemed to imply it .
could he have colonel fitzwilliam in his thoughts ?
she supposed .
if he meant any thing , he must mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter .
it distressed her a little .
and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the pales opposite the parsonage .
she was engaged one day as she walked .
in re-perusing jane 's last letter .
and dwelling on some passages which proved that jane had not written in spirits .
when .
instead of being again surprised by mr. darcy , she saw on looking up that colonel fitzwilliam was meeting her .
putting away the letter immediately and forcing a smile .
she said , `` i did not know before that you ever walked this way . ''
`` i have been making the tour of the park .
'' he replied .
`` as i generally do every year , and intend to close it with a call at the parsonage .
are you going much farther ? ''
`` no , i should have turned in a moment . ''
and accordingly she did turn , and they walked towards the parsonage together .
`` do you certainly leave kent on saturday ? ''
said she .
`` yes .
if darcy does not put it off again .
but i am at his disposal .
he arranges the business just as he pleases . ''
`` and if not able to please himself in the arrangement .
he has at least great pleasure in the power of choice .
i do not know any body who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than mr .
darcy . ''
`` he likes to have his own way very well , '' replied colonel fitzwilliam .
`` but so we all do .
it is only that he has better means of having it than many others .
because he is rich , and many others are poor .
i speak feelingly .
a younger son , you know , must be inured to self-denial and dependence . ''
`` in my opinion , the younger son of an earl can know very little of either .
now , seriously , what have you ever known of self-denial and dependence ?
when have you been prevented by want of money from going wherever you chose .
or procuring any thing you had a fancy for ? ''
`` these are home questions .
and perhaps i can not say that i have experienced many hardships of that nature .
but in matters of greater weight , i may suffer from the want of money .
younger sons can not marry where they like . ''
`` unless where they like women of fortune , which i think they very often do . ''
`` our habits of expence make us too dependant .
and there are not many in my rank of life who
can afford to marry without some attention to money . ''
`` is this , '' thought elizabeth , `` meant for me ? ''
and she coloured at the idea .
but .
recovering herself .
said in a lively tone .
`` and pray , what is the usual price of an earl 's younger son ?
unless the elder brother is very sickly , i suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds . ''
he answered her in the same style , and the subject dropped .
to interrupt a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed .
she soon afterwards said .
`` i imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of having somebody at his disposal .
i wonder he does not marry , to secure a lasting convenience of that kind .
but .
perhaps his sister does as well for the present .
and , as she is under his sole care , he may do what he likes with her . ''
`` no , '' said colonel fitzwilliam , `` that is an advantage which he must divide with me .
i am joined with him in the guardianship of miss darcy . ''
`` are you , indeed ?
and pray what sort of guardians do you make ?
does your charge give you much trouble ?
young ladies of her age .
are sometimes a little difficult to manage .
and if she has the true darcy spirit , she may like to have her own way . ''
as she spoke .
she observed him looking at her earnestly .
and the manner in which he immediately asked her why she supposed miss darcy likely to give them any uneasiness .
convinced her that she had somehow or other got pretty near the truth .
she directly replied , `` you need not be frightened .
i never heard any harm of her .
and i dare say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world .
she is a very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance , mrs. hurst and miss bingley .
i think i have heard you say that you know them . ''
`` i know them a little .
their brother is a pleasant gentleman-like man .
he is a great friend of darcy 's . ''
`` oh !
yes , '' said elizabeth drily .
`` mr. darcy is uncommonly kind to mr. bingley , and takes a prodigious deal of care of him . ''
`` care of him ! .
yes , i really believe darcy does take care of him in those points where he most wants care .
from something that he told me in our journey hither .
i have reason to think bingley very much indebted to him .
but i ought to beg his pardon .
for i have no right to suppose that bingley was the person meant .
it was all conjecture . ''
`` what is it you mean ? ''
`` it is a circumstance which darcy of course would not wish to be generally known .
because if it were to get round to the lady 's family , it would be an unpleasant thing . ''
`` you may depend upon my not mentioning it . ''
`` and remember that i have not much reason for supposing it to be bingley .
what he told me was merely this .
that he congratulated himself on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most imprudent marriage .
but without mentioning names or any other particulars .
and i only suspected it to be bingley from believing him the
kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort .
and from knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer . ''
`` did mr. darcy give you his reasons for this interference ? ''
`` i understood that there were some very strong objections against the lady . ''
`` and what arts did he use to separate them ? ''
`` he did not talk to me of his own arts , '' said fitzwilliam smiling .
`` he only told me , what i have now told you . ''
elizabeth made no answer , and walked on , her heart swelling with indignation .
after watching her a little , fitzwilliam asked her why she was so thoughtful .
`` i am thinking of what you have been telling me , '' said she .
`` your cousin 's conduct does not suit my feelings .
why was he to be the judge ? ''
`` you are rather disposed to call his interference officious ? ''
`` i do not see what right mr. darcy had to decide on the propriety of his friend 's inclination .
or why .
upon his own judgment alone .
he was to determine and direct in what manner that friend was to be happy . ''
`` but .
'' she continued .
recollecting herself , `` as we know none of the particulars , it is not fair to condemn him .
it is not to be supposed that there was much affection in the case . ''
`` that is not an unnatural surmise .
'' said fitzwilliam , `` but it is lessening the honour of my cousin 's triumph very sadly . ''
this was spoken jestingly .
but it appeared to her so just a picture of mr. darcy .
that she would not trust herself with an answer .
and , therefore , abruptly changing the conversation , talked on indifferent matters till they reached the parsonage .
there .
shut into her own room .
as soon as their visitor left them , she could think without interruption of all that she had heard .
it was not to be supposed that any other people could be meant than those with whom she was connected .
there could not exist in the world two men , over whom mr. darcy could have such boundless influence .
that he had been concerned in the measures taken to separate mr. bingley and jane , she had never doubted .
but she had always attributed to miss bingley the principal design and arrangement of them .
if his own vanity .
however .
did not mislead him .
he was the cause .
his pride and caprice were the cause of all that jane had suffered , and still continued to suffer .
he had ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate , generous heart in the world .
and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted .
`` there were some very strong objections against the lady .
'' were colonel fitzwilliam 's words .
and these strong objections probably were .
her having one uncle who was a country attorney , and another who was in business in london .
`` to jane herself , '' she exclaimed , `` there could be no possibility of objection .
all loveliness and goodness as she is !
her understanding excellent , her mind improved , and her manners captivating .
neither could any thing be urged against my father .
who .
though with some peculiarities .
has abilities which mr. darcy himself need not disdain , and respectability which he will probably never reach . ''
when she thought of her mother indeed .
her confidence gave way a little .
but she would not allow that any objections there had material weight with mr. darcy .
whose pride .
she was convinced .
would receive a deeper wound from the want of importance in his friend 's connections .
than from their want of sense .
and she was quite decided at last .
that he had been partly governed by this worst kind of pride .
and partly by the wish of retaining mr. bingley for his sister .
the agitation and tears which the subject occasioned , brought on a headache .
and it grew so much worse towards the evening that .
added to her unwillingness to see mr. darcy .
it determined her not to attend her cousins to rosings , where they were engaged to drink tea .
mrs. collins .
seeing that she was really unwell .
did not press her to go .
and as much as possible prevented her husband from pressing her .
but mr. collins could not conceal his apprehension of lady catherine 's being rather displeased by her staying at home .
when they were gone .
elizabeth .
as if intending to exasperate herself as much as possible against mr. darcy .
chose for her employment the examination of all the letters which
jane had written to her since her being in kent .
they contained no actual complaint .
nor was there any revival of past occurrences , or any communication of present suffering .
but in all .
and in almost every line of each .
there was a want of that cheerfulness which had been used to characterize her style .
and which .
proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself .
and kindly disposed towards every one , had been scarcely ever clouded .
elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness .
with an attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal .
mr. darcy's shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict .
gave her a keener sense of her sister 's sufferings .
it was some consolation to think that his visit to rosings was to end on the day after the next .
and a still greater .
that in less than a fortnight she should herself be with jane again .
and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her spirits , by all that affection could do .
she could not think of darcy 's leaving kent , without remembering that his cousin was to go with him .
but colonel fitzwilliam had made it clear that he had no intentions at all .
and agreeable as he was , she did not mean to be unhappy about him .
while settling this point .
she was suddenly roused by the sound of the door bell .
and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its being colonel fitzwilliam himself .
who had once before called late in the evening , and might now come to enquire particularly after her .
but this idea was soon banished .
and her spirits were very differently affected .
when , to her utter amazement , she saw mr. darcy walk into the room .
in an hurried manner he immediately began an enquiry after her health .
imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better .
she answered him with cold civility .
he sat down for a few moments , and then getting up walked about the room .
elizabeth was surprised , but said not a word .
after a silence of several minutes he came towards her in an agitated manner .
and thus began , `` in vain have i struggled .
it will not do .
my feelings will not be repressed .
you must allow me to tell you how ardently i admire and love you . ''
elizabeth 's astonishment was beyond expression .
she stared , coloured , doubted , and was silent .
this he considered sufficient encouragement .
and the avowal of all that he felt and had long felt for her , immediately followed .
he spoke well .
but there were feelings besides those of the heart to be detailed .
and he was not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride .
his sense of her inferiority .
of its being a degradation .
of the family obstacles which judgment had always opposed to inclination .
were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to the consequence he was wounding .
but was very unlikely to recommend his suit .
in spite of her deeply-rooted dislike .
she could not be insensible to the compliment of such a man 's affection .
and though her intentions did not vary for an instant .
she was at first sorry for the pain he was to receive .
till , roused to resentment by his subsequent language , she lost all compassion in anger .
she tried , however , to compose herself to answer him with patience , when he should have done .
he concluded with representing to her the strength of that attachment which .
in spite of all his endeavours , he had found impossible to conquer .
and with expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of his hand .
as he said this , she could easily see that he had no doubt of a favourable answer .
he spoke of apprehension and anxiety , but his countenance expressed real security .
such a circumstance could only exasperate farther .
and when he ceased .
the colour rose into her cheeks .
and she said .
`` in such cases as this .
it is .
i believe .
the established mode to express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed , however unequally they may be returned .
it is natural that obligation should be felt .
and if i could feel gratitude , i would now thank you .
but i can not .
i have never desired your good opinion , and you have certainly bestowed it most unwillingly .
i am sorry to have occasioned pain to any one .
it has been most unconsciously done , however , and i hope will be of short duration .
the feelings which .
you tell me .
have long prevented the acknowledgment of your regard , can have little difficulty in overcoming it after this explanation . ''
mr. darcy .
who was leaning against the mantle-piece with his eyes fixed on her face .
seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than surprise .
his complexion became pale with anger , and the disturbance of his mind was visible in every feature .
he was struggling for the appearance of composure .
and would not open his lips , till he believed himself to have attained it .
the pause was to elizabeth 's feelings dreadful .
at length .
in a voice of forced calmness .
he said , `` and this is all the reply which i am to have the honour of expecting !
i might .
perhaps , wish to be informed why , with so little endeavour at civility , i am thus rejected .
but it is of small importance . ''
`` i might as well enquire .
'' replied she .
`` why with so evident a design of offending and insulting me .
you chose to tell me that you liked me against your will .
against your reason , and even against your character ?
was not this some excuse for incivility , if i was uncivil ?
but i have other provocations .
you know i have .
had not my own feelings decided against you .
had they been indifferent .
or had they even been favourable .
do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man .
who has been the means of ruining , perhaps for ever , the happiness of a most beloved sister ? ''
as she pronounced these words , mr. darcy changed colour .
but the emotion was short , and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she continued .
`` i have every reason in the world to think ill of you .
no motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted there .
you dare not .
you can not deny that you have been the principal .
if not the only means of dividing them from each other .
of exposing one to the censure of the world for caprice and instability .
the other to its derision for disappointed hopes , and involving them both in misery of the acutest kind . ''
she paused .
and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening with an
air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse .
he even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity .
`` can you deny that you have done it ? ''
she repeated .
with assumed tranquillity he then replied .
`` i have no wish of denying that i did every
thing in my power to separate my friend from your sister .
or that i rejoice in my success .
towards him i have been kinder than towards myself . ''
elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection .
but its meaning did not escape , nor was it likely to conciliate her .
`` but it is not merely this affair , '' she continued , `` on which my dislike is founded .
long before it had taken place , my opinion of you was decided .
your character was unfolded in the recital which i received many months ago from mr. wickham .
on this subject , what can you have to say ?
in what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself ?
or under what misrepresentation , can you here impose upon others ? ''
`` you take an eager interest in that gentleman 's concerns .
'' said darcy in a less tranquil tone , and with a heightened colour .
`` who that knows what his misfortunes have been , can help feeling an interest in him ? ''
`` his misfortunes ! ''
repeated darcy contemptuously .
`` yes , his misfortunes have been great indeed . ''
`` and of your infliction , '' cried elizabeth with energy .
`` you have reduced him to his present state of poverty , comparative poverty .
you have withheld the advantages , which you must know to have been designed for him .
you have deprived the best years of his life .
of that independence which was no less his due than his desert .
you have done all this !
and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortunes with contempt and ridicule . ''
`` and this .
'' cried darcy , as he walked with quick steps across the room , '' is your opinion of me !
this is the estimation in which you hold me !
i thank you for explaining it so fully .
my faults , according to this calculation , are heavy indeed !
but perhaps .
'' added he .
stopping in his walk .
and turning towards her .
`` these offences might have been overlooked .
had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of
the scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design .
these bitter accusations might have been suppressed .
had i with greater policy concealed my struggles .
and flattered you into the belief of my being impelled by unqualified , unalloyed inclination .
by reason , by reflection , by every thing .
but disguise of every sort is my abhorrence .
nor am i ashamed of the feelings i related .
they were natural and just .
could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your connections ?
to congratulate myself on the hope of relations , whose condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own ? ''
elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment .
yet she tried to the utmost to speak with composure when she said .
`` you are mistaken .
mr. darcy .
if you suppose that the mode of your declaration affected me in any other way .
than as it spared me the concern which i might have felt in refusing you .
had you behaved in a more gentleman-like manner . ''
she saw him start at this .
but he said nothing .
and she continued .
`` you could not have made me the offer of your hand in
any possible way that would have tempted me to accept it . ''
again his astonishment was obvious .
and he looked at her with an expression of mingled incredulity and mortification .
she went on .
`` from the very beginning .
from the first moment i may almost say .
of my acquaintance with you .
your manners impressing me with the fullest belief of your arrogance .
your conceit .
and your selfish disdain of the feelings of others .
were such as to form that ground-work of disapprobation , on which succeeding events have built so immoveable a dislike .
and i had not known you a month before i felt that you were the
last man in the world whom i could ever be prevailed on to marry . ''
`` you have said quite enough , madam .
i perfectly comprehend your feelings , and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been .
forgive me for having taken up so much of your time .
and accept my best wishes for your health and happiness . ''
and with these words he hastily left the room .
and elizabeth heard him the next moment open the front door and quit the house .
the tumult of her mind was now painfully great .
she knew not how to support herself , and from actual weakness sat down and cried for half an hour .
her astonishment , as she reflected on what had passed , was increased by every review of it .
that she should receive an offer of marriage from mr. darcy !
that he should have been in love with her for so many months !
so much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of all
the objections which had made him prevent his friend 's marrying her sister .
and which must appear at least with equal force in his own case , was almost incredible !
it was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong an affection .
but his pride .
his abominable pride .
his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to jane .
his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging .
though he could not justify it .
and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned mr. wickham .
his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny .
soon overcame the pity which the consideration of his attachment had for a moment excited .
she continued in very agitating reflections till the sound of lady catherine 's
carriage made her feel how unequal she was to encounter charlotte 's observation .
and hurried her away to her room .
elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations which had at length closed her eyes .
she could not yet recover from the surprise of what had happened .
it was impossible to think of any thing else .
and totally indisposed for employment , she resolved soon after breakfast to indulge herself in air and exercise .
she was proceeding directly to her favourite walk .
when the recollection of mr. darcy's sometimes coming there stopped her .
and instead of entering the park .
she turned up the lane , which led her farther from the turnpike road .
the park paling was still the boundary on one side .
and she soon passed one of the gates into the ground .
after walking two or three times along that part of the lane .
she was tempted .
by the pleasantness of the morning , to stop at the gates and look into the park .
the five weeks which she had now passed in kent .
had made a great difference in the country .
and every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees .
she was on the point of continuing her walk .
when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park .
he was moving that way .
and fearful of its being mr. darcy , she was directly retreating .
but the person who advanced .
was now near enough to see her , and stepping forward with eagerness , pronounced her name .
she had turned away .
but on hearing herself called .
though in a voice which proved it to be mr. darcy , she moved again towards the gate .
he had by that time reached it also .
and holding out a letter .
which she instinctively took .
said with a look of haughty composure .
`` i have been walking in the grove some time in the hope of meeting you .
will you do me the honour of reading that letter ? `` .
and then , with a slight bow , turned again into the plantation , and was soon out of sight .
with no expectation of pleasure .
but with the strongest curiosity .
elizabeth opened the letter .
and to her still increasing wonder .
perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter paper .
written quite through .
in a very close hand.. the envelope itself was likewise full.. pursuing her way along the lane .
she then began it .
it was dated from rosings , at eight o'clock in the morning , and was as follows : .
`` be not alarmed .
madam .
on receiving this letter .
by the apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments .
or renewal of those offers , which were last night so disgusting to you .
i write without any intention of paining you .
or humbling myself .
by dwelling on wishes , which , for the happiness of both , can not be too soon forgotten .
and the effort which the formation .
and the perusal of this letter must occasion .
should have been spared , had not my character required it to be written and read .
you must , therefore , pardon the freedom with which i demand your attention .
your feelings , i know , will bestow it unwillingly , but i demand it of your justice .
`` two offences of a very different nature .
and by no means of equal magnitude , you last night laid to my charge .
the first mentioned was .
that , regardless of the sentiments of either , i had detached mr. bingley from your sister , .
and the other , that i had .
in defiance of various claims .
in defiance of honour and humanity .
ruined the immediate prosperity .
and blasted the prospects of mr. wickham.. wilfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth .
the acknowledged favourite of my father .
a young man who had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage .
and who had been brought up to expect its exertion .
would be a depravity .
to which the separation of two young persons .
whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks .
could bear no comparison.. but from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally bestowed .
respecting each circumstance .
i shall hope to be in future secured .
when the following account of my actions and their motives has been read.. if .
in the explanation of them which is due to myself .
i am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive to your 's .
i can only say that i am sorry.. the necessity must be obeyed .
and farther apology would be absurd.. i had not been long in hertfordshire .
before i saw .
in common with others .
that bingley preferred your eldest sister .
to any other young woman in the country.. but it was not till the evening of the dance at netherfield that
i had any apprehension of his feeling a serious attachment.. i had often seen him in love before.. at that ball .
while i had the honour of dancing with you .
i was first made acquainted .
by sir william lucas 's accidental information .
that bingley 's attentions to your sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage .
he spoke of it as a certain event , of which the time alone could be undecided .
from that moment i observed my friend 's behaviour attentively .
and i could then perceive that his partiality for miss bennet was beyond what i had ever witnessed in him .
your sister i also watched.. her look and manners were open .
cheerful and engaging as ever .
but without any symptom of peculiar regard .
and i remained convinced from the evening 's scrutiny .
that though she received his attentions with pleasure .
she did not invite them by any participation of sentiment.. if you have not been mistaken here .
i must have been in an error .
your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter probable.. if it be so .
if i have been misled by such error .
to inflict pain on her , your resentment has not been unreasonable .
but i shall not scruple to assert .
that the serenity of your sister 's countenance and air was such .
as might have given the most acute observer .
a conviction that .
however amiable her temper .
her heart was not likely to be easily touched.. that i was desirous of believing her indifferent is certain , .
but i will venture to say that my investigations and decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or
fears.. i did not believe her to be indifferent because i wished it.. i believed it on impartial conviction .
as truly as i wished it in reason.. my objections to the marriage were not merely those .
which i last night acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside .
in my own case .
the want of connection could not be so great an evil to my
friend as to me.. but there were other causes of repugnance.. causes which .
though still existing .
and existing to an equal degree in both instances .
i had myself endeavoured to forget .
because they were not immediately before me.. these causes must be stated .
though briefly.. the situation of your mother's family .
though objectionable .
was nothing in comparison of that total want of propriety so frequently .
so almost uniformly betrayed by herself .
by your three younger sisters , and occasionally even by your father.. pardon me.. it pains me to offend you .
but amidst your concern for the defects of your nearest relations .
and your displeasure at this representation of them .
let it give you consolation to consider that .
to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure .
is praise no less generally bestowed on you and your eldest sister .
than it is honourable to the sense and disposition of both.. i will only say farther .
that from what passed that evening .
my opinion of all parties was confirmed .
and every inducement heightened .
which could have led me before .
to preserve my friend from what i esteemed a most unhappy connection.. he left netherfield for london .
on the day following .
as you .
i am certain .
remember .
with the design of soon returning.. the part which i acted .
is now to be explained.. his sisters ' uneasiness had been equally excited with my own .
our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered .
and .
alike sensible that no time was to be lost in detaching their brother .
we shortly resolved on joining him directly in london.. we accordingly went .
and there i readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my friend .
the certain evils of such a choice.. i described .
and enforced them earnestly.. but .
however this remonstrance might have staggered or delayed his determination .
i do not suppose that it would ultimately have prevented the marriage .
had it not been seconded by the assurance which i hesitated not in giving , of your sister 's indifference .
he had before believed her to return his affection with sincere .
if not with equal regard.. but bingley has great natural modesty .
with a stronger dependence on my judgment than on his own.. to convince him .
therefore , that he had deceived himself , was no very difficult point .
to persuade him against returning into hertfordshire .
when that conviction had been given .
was scarcely the work of a moment.. i can not blame myself for having done thus much .
there is but one part of my conduct in the whole affair .
on which i do not reflect with satisfaction .
it is that i condescended to adopt the measures of art so
far as to conceal from him your sister 's being in town .
i knew it myself .
as it was known to miss bingley .
but her brother is even yet ignorant of it.. that they might have met without ill consequence .
is perhaps probable.. but his regard did not appear to me enough
extinguished for him to see her without some danger.. perhaps this concealment .
this disguise .
was beneath me.. it is done .
however .
and it was done for the best.. on this subject i have nothing more to say .
no other apology to offer .
if i have wounded your sister's feelings , it was unknowingly done .
and though the motives which governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient .
i have not yet learnt to condemn them.. with respect to that other .
more weighty accusation .
of having injured mr. wickham .
i can only refute it by laying before you the whole of his connection with my family .
of what he has particularly accused me i am ignorant .
but of the truth of what i shall relate , i can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity .
mr. wickham is the son of a very respectable man .
who had for many years the management of all the pemberley estates .
and whose good conduct in the discharge of his trust .
naturally inclined my father to be of service to him .
and on george wickham , who was his god-son , his kindness was therefore liberally bestowed .
my father supported him at school .
and afterwards at cambridge.. most important assistance .
as his own father .
always poor from the extravagance of his wife , would have been unable to give him a gentleman 's education .
my father was not only fond of this young man 's society , whose manners were always engaging .
he had also the highest opinion of him .
and hoping the church would be his profession , intended to provide for him in it .
as for myself .
it is many , many years since i first began to think of him in a very different manner .
the vicious propensities .
the want of principle which he was careful to guard from the knowledge of his best friend .
could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself .
and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments , which mr. darcy could not have .
here again i shall give you pain .
to what degree you only can tell .
but whatever may be the sentiments which mr. wickham has created .
a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding his real character .
it adds even another motive .
my excellent father died about five years ago .
and his attachment to mr. wickham was to the last so steady .
that in his will he particularly recommended it to me .
to promote his advancement in the best manner that his profession might allow .
and if he took orders .
desired that a valuable family living might be his as soon as soon as it became vacant .
there was also a legacy of one thousand pounds .
his own father did not long survive mine .
and within half a year from these events .
mr. wickham wrote to inform me that .
having finally resolved against taking orders .
he hoped i should not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage .
in lieu of the preferment , by which he could not be benefited .
he had some intention .
he added .
of studying the law .
and i must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very insufficient support therein .
i rather wished , than believed him to be sincere .
but at any rate , was perfectly ready to accede to his proposal .
i knew that mr. wickham ought not to be a clergyman .
the business was therefore soon settled .
he resigned all claim to assistance in the church .
were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to receive it .
and accepted in return three thousand pounds .
all connection between us seemed now dissolved .
i thought too ill of him , to invite him to pemberley , or admit his society in town .
in town i believe he chiefly lived .
but his studying the law was a mere pretence .
and being now free from all restraint , his life was a life of idleness and dissipation .
for about three years i heard little of him .
but on the decease of the incumbent of the living which had been designed for him .
he applied to me again by letter for the presentation .
his circumstances , he assured me , and i had no difficulty in believing it , were exceedingly bad .
he had found the law a most unprofitable study .
and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained , if i would present him to the living in question .
of which he trusted there could be little doubt .
as he was well assured that i had no other person to provide for .
and i could not have forgotten my revered father 's intentions .
you will hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty , or for resisting every repetition of it .
his resentment was in proportion to the distress of his circumstances .
and he was doubtless as violent in his abuse of me to others , as in his reproaches to myself .
after this period , every appearance of acquaintance was dropt .
how he lived i know not .
but last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice .
i must now mention a circumstance which i would wish to forget myself .
and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfold to any human being .
having said thus much , i feel no doubt of your secrecy .
my sister .
who is more than ten years my junior .
was left to the guardianship of my mother 's nephew , colonel fitzwilliam , and myself .
about a year ago , she was taken from school , and an establishment formed for her in london .
and last summer she went with the lady who presided over it , to ramsgate .
and thither also went mr. wickham , undoubtedly by design .
for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between him and mrs. younge .
in whose character we were most unhappily deceived .
and by her connivance and aid .
he so far recommended himself to georgiana .
whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness to her as a child .
that she was persuaded to believe herself in love , and to consent to an elopement .
she was then but fifteen , which must be her excuse .
and after stating her imprudence .
i am happy to add , that i owed the knowledge of it to herself .
i joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the intended elopement .
and then georgiana .
unable to support the idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as a father .
acknowledged the whole to me .
you may imagine what i felt and how i acted .
regard for my sister 's credit and feelings prevented any public exposure .
but i wrote to mr. wickham .
who left the place immediately , and mrs. younge was of course removed from her charge .
mr. wickham 's chief object was unquestionably my sister 's fortune , which is thirty thousand pounds .
but i can not help supposing that the hope of revenging himself on me , was a strong inducement .
his revenge would have been complete indeed .
this , madam , is a faithful narrative of every event in which we have been concerned together .
and if you do not absolutely reject it as false .
you will , i hope , acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards mr. wickham .
i know not in what manner , under what form of falsehood he has imposed on you .
but his success is not perhaps to be wondered at .
ignorant as you previously were of every thing concerning either .
detection could not be in your power , and suspicion certainly not in your inclination .
you may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last night .
but i was not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought to be revealed .
for the truth of every thing here related .
i can appeal more particularly to the testimony of colonel fitzwilliam .
who from our near relationship and constant intimacy .
and still more as one of the executors of my father 's will .
has been unavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions .
if your abhorrence of me should make my assertions valueless .
you can not be prevented by the same cause from confiding in my cousin .
and that there may be the possibility of consulting him .
i shall endeavour to find some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of the morning .
i will only add , god bless you .
`` fitzwilliam darcy . ''
if elizabeth .
when mr. darcy gave her the letter .
did not expect it to contain a renewal of his offers .
she had formed no expectation at all of its contents .
but such as they were .
it may be well supposed how eagerly she went through them , and what a contrariety of emotion they excited .
her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined .
with amazement did she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power .
and steadfastly was she persuaded that he could have no explanation to give .
which a just sense of shame would not conceal .
with a strong prejudice against every thing he might say .
she began his account of what had happened at netherfield .
she read .
with an eagerness which hardly left her power of comprehension .
and from impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring .
was incapable of attending to the sense of the one before her eyes .
his belief of her sister's insensibility .
she instantly resolved to be false .
and his account of the real .
the worst objections to the match , made her too angry to have any wish of doing him justice .
he expressed no regret for what he had done which satisfied her .
his style was not penitent , but haughty .
it was all pride and insolence .
but when this subject was succeeded by his account of mr. wickham .
when she read with somewhat clearer attention .
a relation of events .
which .
if true .
must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth .
and which bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself .
her feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition .
astonishment , apprehension , and even horror , oppressed her .
she wished to discredit it entirely , repeatedly exclaiming , `` this must be false !
this can not be !
this must be the grossest falsehood ! `` .
and when she had gone through the whole letter .
though scarcely knowing any thing of the last page or two .
put it hastily away .
protesting that she would not regard it , that she would never look in it again .
in this perturbed state of mind , with thoughts that could rest on nothing , she walked on .
but it would not do .
in half a minute the letter was unfolded again .
and collecting herself as well as she could .
she again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to wickham .
and commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence .
the account of his connection with the pemberley family , was exactly what he had related himself .
and the kindness of the late mr. darcy .
though she had not before known its extent , agreed equally well with his own words .
so far each recital confirmed the other : but when she came to the will , the difference was great .
what wickham had said of the living was fresh in her memory .
and as she recalled his very words .
it was impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the other .
and , for a few moments , she flattered herself that her wishes did not err .
but when she read .
and re-read with the closest attention .
the particulars immediately following of wickham 's resigning all pretensions to the living .
of his receiving in lieu .
so considerable a sum as three thousand pounds , again was she forced to hesitate .
she put down the letter , weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be impartiality .
deliberated on the probability of each statement .
but with little success .
on both sides it was only assertion .
again she read on .
but every line proved more clearly that the affair .
which she had believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent .
as to render mr. darcy 's conduct in it less than infamous .
was capable of a turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole .
the extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay to mr. wickham 's charge , exceedingly shocked her .
the more so , as she could bring no proof of its injustice .
she had never heard of him before his entrance into the .
.
shire militia .
in which he had engaged at the persuasion of the young man .
who , on meeting him accidentally in town , had there renewed a slight acquaintance .
of his former way of life , nothing had been known in hertfordshire but what he told himself .
as to his real character .
had information been in her power , she had never felt a wish of enquiring .
his countenance , voice , and manner , had established him at once in the possession of every virtue .
she tried to recollect some instance of goodness .
some distinguished trait of integrity or benevolence , that might rescue him from the attacks of mr. darcy .
or at least .
by the predominance of virtue .
atone for those casual errors .
under which she would endeavour to class .
what mr. darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years continuance .
but no such recollection befriended her .
she could see him instantly before her , in every charm of air and address .
but she could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood .
and the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess .
after pausing on this point a considerable while , she once more continued to read .
but , alas !
the story which followed of his designs on miss darcy .
received some confirmation from what had passed between colonel fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before .
and at last she was referred for the truth of every particular to colonel fitzwilliam himself .
from whom she had previously received the information of his near concern in all his cousin 's affairs .
and whose character she had no reason to question .
at one time she had almost resolved on applying to him .
but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application .
and at length wholly banished by the conviction that mr. darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal .
if he had not been well assured of his cousin 's corroboration .
she perfectly remembered every thing that had passed in conversation between wickham and herself .
in their first evening at mr. philips 's .
many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory .
she was now struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger .
and wondered it had escaped her before .
she saw the indelicacy of putting himself forward as he had done .
and the inconsistency of his professions with his conduct .
she remembered that he had boasted of having no fear of seeing mr. darcy .
that mr. darcy might leave the country , but that he should stand his ground .
yet he had avoided the netherfield ball the very next week .
she remembered also .
that till the netherfield family had quitted the country , he had told his story to no one but herself .
but that after their removal , it had been every where discussed .
that he had then no reserves .
no scruples in sinking mr. darcy 's character .
though he had assured her that respect for the father , would always prevent his exposing the son .
how differently did every thing now appear in which he was concerned !
his attentions to miss king were now the consequence of views solely and hatefully mercenary .
and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer the moderation of his wishes .
but his eagerness to grasp at any thing .
his behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive .
he had either been deceived with regard to her fortune .
or had been gratifying his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most incautiously shewn .
every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter and fainter .
and in farther justification of mr. darcy .
she could not but allow that mr. bingley .
when questioned by jane , had long ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair .
that proud and repulsive as were his manners .
she had never .
in the whole course of their acquaintance .
an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much together .
and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways .
seen any thing that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust .
any thing that spoke him of irreligious or immoral habits .
that among his own connections he was esteemed and valued .
that even wickham had allowed him merit as a brother .
and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of
his sister as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling .
that had his actions been what wickham represented them .
so gross a violation of every thing right could hardly have been concealed from the world .
and that friendship between a person capable of it .
and such an amiable man as mr. bingley , was incomprehensible .
she grew absolutely ashamed of herself.. of neither darcy nor wickham could she think .
without feeling that she had been blind , partial , prejudiced , absurd .
`` how despicably have i acted ! ''
she cried.. `` i , who have prided myself on my discernment ! .
i , who have valued myself on my abilities !
who have often disdained the generous candour of my sister .
and gratified my vanity , in useless or blameable distrust.. how humiliating is this discovery ! .
yet , how just a humiliation ! .
had i been in love , i could not have been more wretchedly blind .
but vanity .
not love .
has been my folly.. pleased with the preference of one .
and offended by the neglect of the other .
on the very beginning of our acquaintance .
i have courted prepossession and ignorance , and driven reason away , where either were concerned .
till this moment , i never knew myself . ''
from herself to jane .
from jane to bingley .
her thoughts were in a line which soon brought to her recollection that mr. darcy 's explanation there .
had appeared very insufficient .
and she read it again .
widely different was the effect of a second perusal.. how could she deny that credit to his assertions .
in one instance , which she had been obliged to give in the other ? .
he declared himself to have been totally unsuspicious of her sister 's attachment.. and she could not help remembering what charlotte
's opinion had always been.. neither could she deny the justice of his description of jane.. she felt that jane's feelings .
though fervent .
were little displayed .
and that there was a constant complacency in her air and manner , not often united with great sensibility .
when she came to that part of the letter in which her family were mentioned .
in terms of such mortifying , yet merited reproach , her sense of shame was severe .
the justice of the charge struck her too forcibly for denial .
and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded .
as having passed at the netherfield ball .
and as confirming all his first disapprobation .
could not have made a stronger impression on his mind than on hers .
the compliment to herself and her sister , was not unfelt .
it soothed .
but it could not console her for the contempt which had been thus self-attracted by the rest of her
family.. and as she considered that jane 's disappointment had in fact been the work of her nearest relations .
and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct .
she felt depressed beyond any thing she had ever known before .
after wandering along the lane for two hours , giving way to every variety of thought .
re-considering events .
determining probabilities .
and reconciling herself as well as she could .
to a change so sudden and so important .
fatigue , and a recollection of her long absence , made her at length return home .
and she entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual .
and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make her unfit for conversation .
she was immediately told , that the two gentlemen from rosings had each called during her absence .
mr. darcy .
only for a few minutes to take leave .
but that colonel fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least an hour .
hoping for her return .
and almost resolving to walk after her till she could be
found.. elizabeth could but just affect concern in missing him .
she really rejoiced at it .
colonel fitzwilliam was no longer an object .
she could think only of her letter .
the two gentlemen left rosings the next morning .
and mr. collins having been in waiting near the lodges .
to make them his parting obeisance .
was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence .
of their appearing in very good health .
and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected , after the melancholy scene so lately gone through at rosings .
to rosings he then hastened to console lady catherine , and her daughter .
and on his return .
brought back .
with great satisfaction .
a message from her ladyship .
importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her
very desirous of having them all to dine with her .
elizabeth could not see lady catherine without recollecting .
that had she chosen it .
she might by this time have been presented to her , as her future niece .
nor could she think , without a smile , of what her ladyship 's indignation would have been .
`` what would she have said ? .
how would she have behaved ? ''
were questions with which she amused herself .
their first subject was the diminution of the rosings party.. `` i assure you .
i feel it exceedingly , '' said lady catherine .
`` i believe nobody feels the loss of friends so much as i do .
but i am particularly attached to these young men .
and know them to be so much attached to me ! .
they were excessively sorry to go !
but so they always are .
the dear colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last .
but darcy seemed to feel it most acutely , more i think than last year .
his attachment to rosings , certainly increases . ''
mr. collins had a compliment .
and an allusion to throw in here , which were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter .
lady catherine observed .
after dinner .
that miss bennet seemed out of spirits .
and immediately accounting for it herself .
by supposing that she did not like to go home again so soon .
she added .
`` but if that is the case .
you must write to your mother to beg that you may stay a little longer .
mrs. collins will be very glad of your company , i am sure . ''
`` i am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation .
'' replied elizabeth .
`` but it is not in my power to accept it.. i must be in town next saturday . ''
`` why , at that rate , you will have been here only six weeks .
i expected you to stay two months .
i told mrs. collins so before you came .
there can be no occasion for your going so soon .
mrs. bennet could certainly spare you for another fortnight . ''
`` but my father can not .. he wrote last week to hurry my return . ''
`` oh !
your father of course may spare you .
if your mother can.. daughters are never of so much consequence to a father .
and if you will stay another month complete .
it will be in my power to take one of you as far as london .
for i am going there early in june , for a week .
and as dawson does not object to the barouche box .
there will be very good room for one of you .
and indeed .
if the weather should happen to be cool .
i should not object to taking you both , as you are neither of you large . ''
`` you are all kindness , madam .
but i believe we must abide by our original plan . ''
lady catherine seemed resigned .
`` mrs. collins , you must send a servant with them .
you know i always speak my mind .
and i can not bear the idea of two young women travelling post by themselves .
it is highly improper .
you must contrive to send somebody .
i have the greatest dislike in the world to that sort
of thing.. young women should always be properly guarded and attended .
according to their situation in life .
when my niece georgiana went to ramsgate last summer .
i made a point of her having two men servants go with her.. miss darcy .
the daughter of mr. darcy .
of pemberley .
and lady anne .
could not have appeared with propriety in a different manner.. i am excessively attentive to all those things .
you must send john with the young ladies , mrs. collins .
i am glad it occurred to me to mention it .
for it would really be discreditable to you to let them go alone . ''
`` my uncle is to send a servant for us . ''
`` oh ! .
your uncle ! .
he keeps a man-servant , does he ? .
i am very glad you have somebody who thinks of those things .
where shall you change horses ? .
oh !
bromley , of course.. if you mention my name at the bell , you will be attended to . ''
lady catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey .
and as she did not answer them all herself .
attention was necessary , which elizabeth believed to be lucky for her .
or , with a mind so occupied , she might have forgotten where she was .
reflection must be reserved for solitary hours .
whenever she was alone , she gave way to it as the greatest relief .
and not a day went by without a solitary walk .
in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant recollections .
mr. darcy 's letter , she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart .
she studied every sentence : and her feelings towards its writer were at times widely different .
when she remembered the style of his address , she was still full of indignation .
but when she considered how unjustly she had condemned and upbraided him , her anger was turned against herself .
and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion .
his attachment excited gratitude , his general character respect .
but she could not approve him .
nor could she for a moment repent her refusal , or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again .
in her own past behaviour , there was a constant source of vexation and regret .
and in the unhappy defects of her family a subject of yet heavier chagrin .
they were hopeless of remedy .
her father .
contented with laughing at them , would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his youngest daughters .
and her mother , with manners so far from right herself , was entirely insensible of the evil .
elizabeth had frequently united with jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of catherine and lydia .
but while they were supported by their mother 's indulgence , what chance could there be of improvement ?
catherine , weak-spirited , irritable , and completely under lydia 's guidance , had been always affronted by their advice .
and lydia , self-willed and careless , would scarcely give them a hearing .
they were ignorant , idle , and vain .
while there was an officer in meryton , they would flirt with him .
and while meryton was within a walk of longbourn , they would be going there for ever .
anxiety on jane 's behalf .
was another prevailing concern .
and mr. darcy 's explanation .
by restoring bingley to all her former good opinion , heightened the sense of what jane had lost .
his affection was proved to have been sincere .
and his conduct cleared of all blame .
unless any could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend .
how grievous then was the thought that .
of a situation so desirable in every respect .
so replete with advantage .
so promising for happiness , jane had been deprived , by the folly and indecorum of her own family !
when to these recollections was added the developement of wickham's character .
it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed before .
were now so much affected as to make it almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful .
their engagements at rosings were as frequent during the last week of her stay .
as they had been at first .
the very last evening was spent there .
and her ladyship again enquired minutely into the particulars of their journey .
gave them directions as to the best method of packing .
and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right way .
that maria thought herself obliged .
on her return , to undo all the work of the morning , and pack her trunk afresh .
when they parted .
lady catherine .
with great condescension , wished them a good journey , and invited them to come to hunsford again next year .
and miss de bourgh exerted herself so far as to curtsey and hold out her hand to both .
on saturday morning elizabeth and mr. collins met for breakfast a few minutes before the others appeared .
and he took the opportunity of paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary .
`` i know not .
miss elizabeth .
'' said he .
`` whether mrs. collins has yet expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us .
but i am very certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for it .
the favour of your company has been much felt , i assure you .
we know how little there is to tempt any one to our humble abode .
our plain manner of living .
our small rooms .
and few domestics .
and the little we see of the world , must make hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like yourself .
but i hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension .
and that we have done every thing in our power to prevent your spending your time unpleasantly . ''
elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness .
she had spent six weeks with great enjoyment .
and the pleasure of being with charlotte .
and the kind attentions she had received , must make her feel the obliged .
mr. collins was gratified .
and with a more smiling solemnity replied .
`` it gives me the greatest pleasure to hear that you have passed your time not disagreeably .
we have certainly done our best .
and most fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior society .
and from our connection with rosings .
the frequent means of varying the humble home scene .
i think we may flatter ourselves that your hunsford visit can not have been entirely irksome .
our situation with regard to lady catherine 's family is indeed
the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast .
you see on what a footing we are .
you see how continually we are engaged there .
in truth i must acknowledge that .
with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage .
i should not think any one abiding in it an object of compassion .
while they are sharers of our intimacy at rosings . ''
words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings .
and he was obliged to walk about the room .
while elizabeth tried to unite civility and truth in a few short sentences .
`` you may , in fact , carry a very favourable report of us into hertfordshire , my dear cousin .
i flatter myself at least that you will be able to do so .
lady catherine 's great attentions to mrs. collins you have been a daily witness of .
and altogether i trust it does not appear that your friend has drawn an unfortunate .
but on this point it will be as well to be silent .
only let me assure you .
my dear miss elizabeth , that i can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in marriage .
my dear charlotte and i have but one mind and one way of thinking .
there is in every thing a most remarkable resemblance of character and ideas between us .
we seem to have been designed for each other . ''
elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was the case .
and with equal sincerity could add that she firmly believed and rejoiced in his domestic comforts .
she was not sorry .
however , to have the recital of them interrupted by the entrance of the lady from whom they sprung .
poor charlotte ! .
it was melancholy to leave her to such society ! .
but she had chosen it with her eyes open .
and though evidently regretting that her visitors were to go , she did not seem to ask for compassion .
her home and her housekeeping .
her parish and her poultry , and all their dependent concerns , had not yet lost their charms .
at length the chaise arrived .
the trunks were fastened on , the parcels placed within , and it was pronounced to be ready .
after an affectionate parting between the friends .
elizabeth was attended to the carriage by mr. collins .
and as they walked down the garden .
he was commissioning her with his best respects to all her family .
not forgetting his thanks for the kindness he had received at longbourn in the winter .
and his compliments to mr. and mrs. gardiner , though unknown .
he then handed her in .
maria followed .
and the door was on the point of being closed .
when he suddenly reminded them .
with some consternation , that they had hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies of rosings .
`` but .
'' he added .
`` you will of course wish to have your humble respects delivered to them .
with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you while you have been here . ''
elizabeth made no objection.. the door was then allowed to be shut , and the carriage drove off .
`` good gracious ! ''
cried maria .
after a few minutes silence , `` it seems but a day or two since we first came ! .
and yet how many things have happened ! ''
`` a great many indeed , '' said her companion with a sigh .
`` we have dined nine times at rosings , besides drinking tea there twice ! .
how much i shall have to tell ! ''
elizabeth privately added , `` and how much i shall have to conceal . ''
their journey was performed without much conversation , or any alarm .
and within four hours of their leaving hunsford .
they reached mr. gardiner's house , where they were to remain a few days .
jane looked well .
and elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her spirits .
amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her aunt had reserved for them .
but jane was to go home with her , and at longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation .
it was not without an effort meanwhile that she could wait even for longbourn .
before she told her sister of mr. darcy 's proposals .
to know that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish jane .
and must .
at the same time .
so highly gratify whatever of her own vanity she had not yet been able to reason away .
was such a temptation to openness as nothing could have conquered .
but the state of indecision in which she remained , as to the extent of what she should communicate .
and her fear .
if she once entered on the subject .
of being hurried into repeating something of bingley , which might only grieve her sister farther .
it was the second week in may .
in which the three young ladies set out together from gracechurch-street , for the town of .
.
in hertfordshire .
and .
as they drew near the appointed inn where mr. bennet 's carriage was to meet them .
they quickly perceived .
in token of the coachman's punctuality , both kitty and lydia looking out of a dining-room up stairs .
these two girls had been above an hour in the place .
happily employed in visiting an opposite milliner , watching the sentinel on guard , and dressing a sallad and cucumber .
after welcoming their sisters .
they triumphantly displayed a table set out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords .
exclaiming , '' is not this nice ?
is not this an agreeable surprise ? ''
`` and we mean to treat you all , '' added lydia .
`` but you must lend us the money .
for we have just spent ours at the shop out there . ''
then shewing her purchases : `` look here , i have bought this bonnet .
i do not think it is very pretty .
but i thought i might as well buy it as not .
i shall pull it to pieces as soon as i get home .
and see if i can make it up any better . ''
and when her sisters abused it as ugly , she added , with perfect unconcern , `` oh !
but there were two or three much uglier in the shop .
and when i have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh .
i think it will be very tolerable .
besides , it will not much signify what one wears this summer , after the .
.
shire have left meryton , and they are going in a fortnight . ''
`` are they indeed ? ''
cried elizabeth , with the greatest satisfaction .
`` they are going to be encamped near brighton .
and i do so want papa to take us all there for the summer !
it would be such a delicious scheme , and i dare say would hardly cost any thing at all .
mamma would like to go too of all things !
only think what a miserable summer else we shall have ! ''
`` yes .
'' thought elizabeth .
`` that would be a delightful scheme , indeed , and completely do for us at once .
good heaven !
brighton .
and a whole campful of soldiers .
to us .
who have been overset already by one poor regiment of militia , and the monthly balls of meryton . ''
`` now i have got some news for you , '' said lydia , as they sat down to table .
`` what do you think ?
it is excellent news , capital news , and about a certain person that we all like . ''
jane and elizabeth looked at each other , and the waiter was told that he need not stay .
lydia laughed , and said , `` aye , that is just like your formality and discretion .
you thought the waiter must not hear , as if he cared !
i dare say he often hears worse things said than i am going to say .
but he is an ugly fellow !
i am glad he is gone .
i never saw such a long chin in my life .
well , but now for my news : it is about dear wickham .
too good for the waiter , is not it ?
there is no danger of wickham 's marrying mary king .
there 's for you !
she is gone down to her uncle at liverpool .
gone to stay .
wickham is safe . ''
`` and mary king is safe ! ''
added elizabeth .
`` safe from a connection imprudent as to fortune . ''
`` she is a great fool for going away , if she liked him . ''
`` but i hope there is no strong attachment on either side , '' said jane .
`` i am sure there is not on his .
i will answer for it he never cared three straws about her .
who could about such a nasty little freckled thing ? ''
elizabeth was shocked to think that .
however incapable of such coarseness of expression herself .
the coarseness of the sentiment was little other than her own breast had formerly harboured and fancied liberal !
as soon as all had ate , and the elder ones paid , the carriage was ordered .
and after some contrivance .
the whole party .
with all their boxes .
workbags .
and parcels , and the unwelcome addition of kitty 's and lydia 's purchases , were seated in it .
`` how nicely we are crammed in ! ''
cried lydia .
`` i am glad i bought my bonnet , if it is only for the fun of having another bandbox !
well , now let us be quite comfortable and snug , and talk and laugh all the way home .
and in the first place , let us hear what has happened to you all , since you went away .
have you seen any pleasant men ?
have you had any flirting ?
i was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband before you came back .
jane will be quite an old maid soon , i declare .
she is almost three and twenty !
lord , how ashamed i should be of not being married before three and twenty !
my aunt philips wants you so to get husbands , you ca n't think .
she says lizzy had better have taken mr. collins .
but i do not think there would have been any fun in it .
lord !
how i should like to be married before any of you .
and then i would chaperon you about to all the balls .
dear me !
we had such a good piece of fun the other day at colonel forster 's .
kitty and me were to spend the day there .
and mrs. forster promised to have a little dance in the evening .
( by the bye , mrs. forster and me are such friends ! )
and so she asked the two harringtons to come .
but harriet was ill , and so pen was forced to come by herself .
and then , what do you think we did ?
we dressed up chamberlayne in woman 's clothes , on purpose to pass for a lady , .
only think what fun !
not a soul knew of it .
but col. and mrs. forster .
and kitty and me , except my aunt , for we were forced to borrow one of her gowns .
and you can not imagine how well he looked !
when denny .
and wickham .
and pratt .
and two or three more of the men came in , they did not know him in the least .
lord !
how i laughed !
and so did mrs. forster .
i thought i should have died .
and that made the men suspect something , and then they soon found out what was the matter . ''
with such kind of histories of their parties and good jokes .
did lydia .
assisted by kitty 's hints and additions , endeavour to amuse her companions all the way to longbourn .
elizabeth listened as little as she could , but there was no escaping the frequent mention of wickham 's name .
their reception at home was most kind .
mrs. bennet rejoiced to see jane in undiminished beauty .
and more than once during dinner did mr. bennet say voluntarily to elizabeth .
`` i am glad you are come back , lizzy . ''
their party in the dining-room was large .
for almost all the lucases came to meet maria and hear
the news : and various were the subjects which occupied them .
lady lucas was enquiring of maria across the table , after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter .
mrs. bennet was doubly engaged .
on one hand collecting an account of the present fashions from jane .
who sat some way below her , and on the other , retailing them all to the younger miss lucases .
and lydia .
in a voice rather louder than any other person 's .
was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to any body who would hear her .
`` oh !
mary , '' said she , `` i wish you had gone with us , for we had such fun !
as we went along .
kitty and me drew up all the blinds , and pretended there was nobody in the coach .
and i should have gone so all the way , if kitty had not been sick .
and when we got to the george .
i do think we behaved very handsomely .
for we treated the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world .
and if you would have gone , we would have treated you too .
and then when we came away it was such fun !
i thought we never should have got into the coach .
i was ready to die of laughter .
and then we were so merry all the way home !
we talked and laughed so loud , that any body might have heard us ten miles off ! ''
to this .
mary very gravely replied , `` far be it from me , my dear sister , to depreciate such pleasures .
they would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female minds .
but i confess they would have no charms for me .
i should infinitely prefer a book . ''
but of this answer lydia heard not a word .
she seldom listened to any body for more than half a minute , and never attended to mary at all .
in the afternoon lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls
to walk to meryton and see how every body went on .
but elizabeth steadily opposed the scheme .
it should not be said .
that the miss bennets could not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers .
there was another reason too for her opposition .
she dreaded seeing wickham again , and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible .
the comfort to her , of the regiment 's approaching removal , was indeed beyond expression .
in a fortnight they were to go .
and once gone , she hoped there could be nothing more to plague her on his account .
she had not been many hours at home .
before she found that the brighton scheme .
of which lydia had given them a hint at the inn , was under frequent discussion between her parents .
elizabeth saw directly that her father had not the smallest intention of yielding .
but his answers were at the same time so vague and equivocal .
that her mother , though often disheartened , had never yet despaired of succeeding at last .
elizabeth 's impatience to acquaint jane with what had happened could no longer be overcome .
and at length resolving to suppress every particular in which her sister was concerned .
and preparing her to be surprised .
she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene between mr. darcy and herself .
miss bennet 's astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly
partiality which made any admiration of elizabeth appear perfectly natural .
and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings .
she was sorry that mr. darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so little suited to recommend them .
but still more was she grieved for the unhappiness which her sister 's refusal must have given him .
`` his being so sure of succeeding , was wrong , '' said she .
`` and certainly ought not to have appeared .
but consider how much it must increase his disappointment . ''
`` indeed , '' replied elizabeth , `` i am heartily sorry for him .
but he has other feelings which will probably soon drive away his regard for me .
you do not blame me , however , for refusing him ? ''
`` blame you !
oh , no . ''
`` but you blame me for having spoken so warmly of wickham . ''
`` no .
i do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did . ''
`` but you will know it , when i have told you what happened the very next day . ''
she then spoke of the letter , repeating the whole of its contents as far as they concerned george wickham .
what a stroke was this for poor jane !
who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that
so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind .
as was here collected in one individual .
nor was darcy 's vindication , though grateful to her feelings , capable of consoling her for such discovery .
most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error .
and seek to clear one , without involving the other .
`` this will not do , '' said elizabeth .
`` you never will be able to make both of them good for any thing .
take your choice , but you must be satisfied with only one .
there is but such a quantity of merit between them .
just enough to make one good sort of man .
and of late it has been shifting about pretty much .
for my part .
i am inclined to believe it all mr. darcy 's , but you shall do as you chuse . ''
it was some time , however , before a smile could be extorted from jane .
`` i do not know when i have been more shocked , '' said she .
`` wickham so very bad !
it is almost past belief .
and poor mr. darcy !
dear lizzy , only consider what he must have suffered .
such a disappointment !
and with the knowledge of your ill opinion too !
and having to relate such a thing of his sister !
it is really too distressing .
i am sure you must feel it so . ''
`` oh !
no , my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so full of both .
i know you will do him such ample justice , that i am growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent .
your profusion makes me saving .
and if you lament over him much longer , my heart will be as light as a feather . ''
`` poor wickham .
there is such an expression of goodness in his countenance !
such an openness and gentleness in his manner . ''
`` there certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those two young men .
one has got all the goodness , and the other all the appearance of it . ''
`` i never thought mr. darcy so deficient in the appearance of it as you used to do . ''
`` and yet i meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike to him .
without any reason .
it is such a spur to one 's genius .
such an opening for wit to have a dislike of that kind .
one may be continually abusive without saying any thing just .
but one can not be always laughing at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty . ''
`` lizzy .
when you first read that letter .
i am sure you could not treat the matter as you do now . ''
`` indeed i could not .
i was uncomfortable enough .
i was very uncomfortable , i may say unhappy .
and with no one to speak to .
of what i felt .
no jane to comfort me and say that i had not been
so very weak and vain and nonsensical as i knew i had !
oh !
how i wanted you ! ''
`` how unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions in speaking of wickham to mr. darcy .
for now they do appear wholly undeserved . ''
`` certainly .
but the misfortune of speaking with bitterness , is a most natural consequence of the prejudices i had been encouraging .
there is one point , on which i want your advice .
i want to be told whether i ought .
or ought not to make our acquaintance in general understand wickham 's character . ''
miss bennet paused a little and then replied .
`` surely there can be no occasion for exposing him so dreadfully .
what is your own opinion ? ''
`` that it ought not to be attempted .
mr. darcy has not authorised me to make his communication public .
on the contrary every particular relative to his sister .
was meant to be kept as much as possible to myself .
and if i endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his conduct , who will believe me ?
the general prejudice against mr. darcy is so violent .
that it would be the death of half the good people in meryton .
to attempt to place him in an amiable light .
i am not equal to it .
wickham will soon be gone .
and therefore it will not signify to anybody here , what he really is .
sometime hence it will be all found out .
and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before .
at present i will say nothing about it . ''
`` you are quite right .
to have his errors made public might ruin him for ever .
he is now perhaps sorry for what he has done , and anxious to re-establish a character .
we must not make him desperate . ''
the tumult of elizabeth 's mind was allayed by this conversation .
she had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a fortnight .
and was certain of a willing listener in jane , whenever she might wish to talk again of either .
but there was still something lurking behind , of which prudence forbad the disclosure .
she dared not relate the other half of mr. darcy 's letter .
nor explain to her sister how sincerely she had been valued by his friend .
here was knowledge in which no one could partake .
and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfect understanding between the
parties could justify her in throwing off this last incumbrance of mystery .
`` and then .
'' said she .
`` if that very improbable event should ever take place .
i shall merely be able to tell what bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself .
the liberty of communication can not be mine till it has lost all its value ! ''
she was now .
on being settled at home , at leisure to observe the real state of her sister 's spirits .
jane was not happy .
she still cherished a very tender affection for bingley .
having never even fancied herself in love before .
her regard had all the warmth of first attachment .
and from her age and disposition , greater steadiness than first attachments often boast .
and so fervently did she value his remembrance .
and prefer him to every other man .
that all her good sense .
and all her attention to the feelings of her friends .
were requisite to check the indulgence of those regrets .
which must have been injurious to her own health and their tranquillity .
`` well .
lizzy .
'' said mrs. bennet one day , `` what is your opinion now of this sad business of jane 's ?
for my part , i am determined never to speak of it again to anybody .
i told my sister philips so the other day .
but i can not find out that jane saw any thing of him in london .
well , he is a very undeserving young man .
and i do not suppose there is the least chance in the world of her ever getting him now .
there is no talk of his coming to netherfield again in the summer .
and i have enquired of every body too , who is likely to know . ''
`` i do not believe that he will ever live at netherfield any more . ''
`` oh , well !
it is just as he chooses .
nobody wants him to come .
though i shall always say that he used my daughter extremely ill. and if i was her .
i would not have put up with it .
well .
my comfort is .
i am sure jane will die of a broken heart .
and then he will be sorry for what he has done . ''
but as elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation , she made no answer .
`` well .
lizzy , '' continued her mother soon afterwards , `` and so the collinses live very comfortable , do they ?
well , well , i only hope it will last .
and what sort of table do they keep ?
charlotte is an excellent manager , i dare say .
if she is half as sharp as her mother , she is saving enough .
there is nothing extravagant in their housekeeping , i dare say . ''
`` no , nothing at all . ''
`` a great deal of good management , depend upon it .
yes , yes .
they will take care not to outrun their income .
they will never be distressed for money .
well , much good may it do them !
and so , i suppose , they often talk of having longbourn when your father is dead .
they look upon it quite as their own , i dare say , whenever that happens . ''
`` it was a subject which they could not mention before me . ''
`` no .
it would have been strange if they had .
but i make no doubt , they often talk of it between themselves .
well .
if they can be easy with an estate that is not lawfully their own , so much the better .
i should be ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me . ''
the first week of their return was soon gone .
the second began .
it was the last of the regiment 's stay in meryton .
and all the young ladies in the neighbourhood were drooping apace .
the dejection was almost universal .
the elder miss bennets alone were still able to eat .
drink , and sleep , and pursue the usual course of their employments .
very frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by kitty and lydia .
whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard-heartedness in any of the family .
`` good heaven !
what is to become of us !
what are we to do ! ''
would they often exclaim in the bitterness of woe .
`` how can you be smiling so , lizzy ? ''
their affectionate mother shared all their grief .
she remembered what she had herself endured on a similar occasion , five and twenty years ago .
`` i am sure .
'' said she , `` i cried for two days together when colonel millar 's regiment went away .
i thought i should have broke my heart . ''
`` i am sure i shall break mine , '' said lydia .
`` if one could but go to brighton ! ''
observed mrs. bennet .
`` oh , yes ! .
if one could but go to brighton !
but papa is so disagreeable . ''
`` a little sea-bathing would set me up for ever . ''
`` and my aunt philips is sure it would do me a great deal of good , '' added kitty .
such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through longbourn-house .
elizabeth tried to be diverted by them .
but all sense of pleasure was lost in shame .
she felt anew the justice of mr. darcy's objections .
and never had she before been so much disposed to pardon his interference in the views of his friend .
but the gloom of lydia 's prospect was shortly cleared away .
for she received an invitation from mrs. forster .
the wife of the colonel of the regiment , to accompany her to brighton .
this invaluable friend was a very young woman , and very lately married .
a resemblance in good humour and good spirits had recommended her and lydia to each other .
and out of their three months ' acquaintance they had been intimate two .
the rapture of lydia on this occasion .
her adoration of mrs. forster .
the delight of mrs. bennet , and the mortification of kitty , are scarcely to be described .
wholly inattentive to her sister 's feelings .
lydia flew about the house in restless ecstacy .
calling for every one's congratulations , and laughing and talking with more violence than ever .
whilst the luckless kitty continued in the parlour repining at her
fate in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish .
`` i can not see why mrs. forster should not ask me as well as lydia .
'' said she , `` though i am not her particular friend .
i have just as much right to be asked as she has .
and more too , for i am two years older . ''
in vain did elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable , and jane to make her resigned .
as for elizabeth herself .
this invitation was so far from exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and lydia .
that she considered it as the death-warrant of all possibility of common sense for the latter .
and detestable as such a step must make her were it known .
she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her go .
she represented to him all the improprieties of lydia 's general behaviour .
the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of such a woman as mrs. forster .
and the probability of her being yet more imprudent with such a companion at brighton .
where the temptations must be greater than at home .
he heard her attentively .
and then said .
`` lydia will never be easy till she has exposed herself in some public place or other .
and we can never expect her to do it with so little
expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present circumstances . ''
`` if you were aware .
'' said elizabeth .
`` of the very great disadvantage to us all .
which must arise from the public notice of lydia 's unguarded and imprudent manner .
nay , which has already arisen from it , i am sure you would judge differently in the affair . ''
`` already arisen ! ''
repeated mr. bennet .
`` what , has she frightened away some of your lovers ?
poor little lizzy !
but do not be cast down .
such squeamish youths as can not bear to be connected with a little absurdity , are not worth a regret .
come .
let me see the list of the pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by lydia 's folly . ''
`` indeed you are mistaken .
i have no such injuries to resent .
it is not of peculiar , but of general evils , which i am now complaining .
our importance .
our respectability in the world .
must be affected by the wild volatility , the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark lydia 's character .
excuse me .
for i must speak plainly .
if you .
my dear father .
will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits .
and of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of her life .
she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment .
her character will be fixed .
and she will , at sixteen , be the most determined flirt that ever made herself and her family ridiculous .
a flirt too , in the worst and meanest degree of flirtation .
without any attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person .
and from the ignorance and emptiness of her mind .
wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal contempt which her rage for admiration will excite .
in this danger kitty is also comprehended .
she will follow wherever lydia leads .
vain , ignorant , idle , and absolutely uncontrouled !
oh !
my dear father .
can you suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever they are known .
and that their sisters will not be often involved in the disgrace ? ''
mr. bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject .
and affectionately taking her hand , said in reply , `` do not make yourself uneasy , my love .
wherever you and jane are known , you must be respected and valued .
and you will not appear to less advantage for having a couple of .
or i may say , three very silly sisters .
we shall have no peace at longbourn if lydia does not go to brighton .
let her go then .
colonel forster is a sensible man , and will keep her out of any real mischief .
and she is luckily too poor to be an object of prey to any body .
at brighton she will be of less importance even as a common flirt than she has been here .
the officers will find women better worth their notice .
let us hope , therefore , that her being there may teach her her own insignificance .
at any rate .
she can not grow many degrees worse .
without authorizing us to lock her up for the rest of her life . ''
with this answer elizabeth was forced to be content .
but her own opinion continued the same , and she left him disappointed and sorry .
it was not in her nature , however , to increase her vexations , by dwelling on them .
she was confident of having performed her duty .
and to fret over unavoidable evils , or augment them by anxiety , was no part of her disposition .
had lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her father .
their indignation would hardly have found expression in their united volubility .
in lydia 's imagination , a visit to brighton comprised every possibility of earthly happiness .
she saw with the creative eye of fancy , the streets of that gay bathing place covered with officers .
she saw herself the object of attention , to tens and to scores of them at present unknown .
she saw all the glories of the camp .
its tents stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines .
crowded with the young and the gay , and dazzling with scarlet .
and to complete the view .
she saw herself seated beneath a tent , tenderly flirting with at least six officers at once .
had she known that her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and such realities as these .
what would have been her sensations ?
they could have been understood only by her mother , who might have felt nearly the same .
lydia 's going to brighton was all that consoled her for the
melancholy conviction of her husband 's never intending to go there himself .
but they were entirely ignorant of what had passed .
and their raptures continued with little intermission to the very day of lydia 's leaving home .
elizabeth was now to see mr. wickham for the last time .
having been frequently in company with him since her return , agitation was pretty well over .
the agitations of former partiality entirely so .
she had even learnt to detect .
in the very gentleness which had first delighted her , an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary .
in his present behaviour to herself .
moreover .
she had a fresh source of displeasure .
for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those attentions which had marked the early part of their acquaintance .
could only serve , after what had since passed , to provoke her .
she lost all concern for him in finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous gallantry .
and while she steadily repressed it .
could not but feel the reproof contained in his believing .
that however long .
and for whatever cause .
his attentions had been withdrawn .
her vanity would be gratified and her preference secured at any time by their renewal .
on the very last day of the regiment 's remaining in meryton .
he dined with others of the officers at longbourn .
and so little was elizabeth disposed to part from him in good humour .
that on his making some enquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at hunsford .
she mentioned colonel fitzwilliam 's and mr. darcy 's having both spent three weeks at rosings .
and asked him if he were acquainted with the former .
he looked surprised , displeased , alarmed .
but with a moment's recollection and a returning smile , replied , that he had formerly seen him often .
and after observing that he was a very gentleman-like man , asked her how she had liked him .
her answer was warmly in his favour .
with an air of indifference he soon afterwards added .
`` how long did you say that he was at rosings ? ''
`` nearly three weeks . ''
`` and you saw him frequently ? ''
`` yes , almost every day . ''
`` his manners are very different from his cousin 's . ''
`` yes , very different .
but i think mr. darcy improves on acquaintance . ''
`` indeed ! ''
cried wickham with a look which did not escape her .
`` and pray may i ask ? ''
but checking himself , he added in a gayer tone , `` is it in address that he improves ?
has he deigned to add ought of civility to his ordinary style ?
for i dare not hope .
'' he continued in a lower and more serious tone , `` that he is improved in essentials . ''
`` oh , no ! ''
said elizabeth .
`` in essentials , i believe , he is very much what he ever was . ''
while she spoke .
wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to rejoice over her words , or to distrust their meaning .
there was a something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive and anxious attention .
while she added .
`` when i said that he improved on acquaintance .
i did not mean that either his mind or manners were in a state of improvement .
but that from knowing him better , his disposition was better understood . ''
wickham 's alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated look .
for a few minutes he was silent .
till .
shaking off his embarrassment .
he turned to her again .
and said in the gentlest of accents .
`` you .
who so well know my feelings towards mr. darcy .
will readily comprehend how sincerely i must rejoice that he is
wise enough to assume even the appearance of what is right .
his pride .
in that direction .
may be of service .
if not to himself .
to many others , for it must deter him from such foul misconduct as i have suffered by .
i only fear that the sort of cautiousness .
to which you .
i imagine .
have been alluding .
is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt .
of whose good opinion and judgment he stands much in awe .
his fear of her , has always operated , i know , when they were together .
and a good deal is to be imputed to his wish of forwarding the match with miss de bourgh .
which i am certain he has very much at heart . ''
elizabeth could not repress a smile at this , but she answered only by a slight inclination of the head .
she saw that he wanted to engage her on the old subject of his grievances .
and she was in no humour to indulge him .
the rest of the evening passed with the appearance .
on his side , of usual cheerfulness , but with no farther attempt to distinguish elizabeth .
and they parted at last with mutual civility , and possibly a mutual desire of never meeting again .
when the party broke up .
lydia returned with mrs. forster to meryton , from whence they were to set out early the next morning .
the separation between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic .
kitty was the only one who shed tears .
but she did weep from vexation and envy .
mrs. bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter .
and impressive in her injunctions that she would not miss the opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible .
advice , which there was every reason to believe would be attended to .
and in the clamorous happiness of lydia herself in bidding farewell .
the more gentle adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard .
had elizabeth 's opinion been all drawn from her own family .
she could not have formed a very pleasing picture of conjugal felicity or domestic comfort .
her father captivated by youth and beauty .
and that appearance of good humour .
which youth and beauty generally give .
had married a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind .
had very early in their marriage put an end to all real affection for her .
respect , esteem , and confidence , had vanished for ever .
and all his views of domestic happiness were overthrown .
but mr. bennet was not of a disposition to seek comfort
for the disappointment which his own imprudence had brought on .
in any of those pleasures which too often console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice .
he was fond of the country and of books .
and from these tastes had arisen his principal enjoyments .
to his wife he was very little otherwise indebted .
than as her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement .
this is not the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his wife .
but where other powers of entertainment are wanting , the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given .
elizabeth , however , had never been blind to the impropriety of her father 's behaviour as a husband .
she had always seen it with pain .
but respecting his abilities .
and grateful for his affectionate treatment of herself .
she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook .
and to banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which .
in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own children , was so highly reprehensible .
but she had never felt so strongly as now .
the disadvantages which must attend the children of so unsuitable a marriage .
nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising from so ill-judged a direction of talents .
talents which rightly used .
might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters .
even if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife .
when elizabeth had rejoiced over wickham 's departure .
she found little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment .
their parties abroad were less varied than before .
and at home she had a mother and sister whose constant repinings at the dulness of every thing around them .
threw a real gloom over their domestic circle .
and .
though kitty might in time regain her natural degree of sense .
since the disturbers of her brain were removed .
her other sister .
from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehended .
was likely to be hardened in all her folly and assurance .
by a situation of such double danger as a watering place and a camp .
upon the whole .
therefore .
she found .
what has been sometimes found before .
that an event to which she had looked forward with impatient desire .
did not in taking place , bring all the satisfaction she had promised herself .
it was consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity .
to have some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed .
and by again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation , console herself for the present , and prepare for another disappointment .
her tour to the lakes was now the object of her happiest thoughts .
it was her best consolation for all the uncomfortable hours .
which the discontentedness of her mother and kitty made inevitable .
and could she have included jane in the scheme , every part of it would have been perfect .
`` but it is fortunate , '' thought she , `` that i have something to wish for .
were the whole arrangement complete , my disappointment would be certain .
but here .
by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my sister 's absence .
i may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of pleasure realized .
a scheme of which every part promises delight , can never be successful .
and general disappointment is only warded off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation . ''
when lydia went away , she promised to write very often and very minutely to her mother and kitty .
but her letters were always long expected , and always very short .
those to her mother .
contained little else .
than that they were just returned from the library .
where such and such officers had attended them .
and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as made her quite wild .
that she had a new gown .
or a new parasol .
which she would have described more fully .
but was obliged to leave off in a violent hurry .
as mrs. forster called her .
and they were going to the camp.. and from her correspondence with her sister .
there was still less to be learnt .
for her letters to kitty .
though rather longer , were much too full of lines under the words to be made public .
after the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence .
health , good humour and cheerfulness began to re-appear at longbourn .
everything wore a happier aspect .
the families who had been in town for the winter came back again .
and summer finery and summer engagements arose .
mrs. bennet was restored to her usual querulous serenity .
and by the middle of june kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter meryton without tears .
an event of such happy promise as to make elizabeth hope .
that by the following christmas .
she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day .
unless by some cruel and malicious arrangement at the war-office , another regiment should be quartered in meryton .
the time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast approaching .
and a fortnight only was wanting of it .
when a letter arrived from mrs. gardiner , which at once delayed its commencement and curtailed its extent .
mr. gardiner would be prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in july .
and must be in london again within a month .
and as that left too short a period for them to go so far .
and see so much as they had proposed .
or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort they had built on .
they were obliged to give up the lakes , and substitute a more contracted tour .
and , according to the present plan , were to go no farther northward than derbyshire .
in that county , there was enough to be seen , to occupy the chief of their three weeks .
and to mrs. gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction .
the town where she had formerly passed some years of her life .
and where they were now to spend a few days .
was probably as great an object of her curiosity .
as all the celebrated beauties of matlock , chatsworth , dovedale , or the peak .
elizabeth was excessively disappointed .
she had set her heart on seeing the lakes .
and still thought there might have been time enough .
but it was her business to be satisfied .
and certainly her temper to be happy .
and all was soon right again .
with the mention of derbyshire , there were many ideas connected .
it was impossible for her to see the word without thinking of pemberley and its owner .
`` but surely .
'' said she .
`` i may enter his county with impunity .
and rob it of a few petrified spars without his perceiving me . ''
the period of expectation was now doubled .
four weeks were to pass away before her uncle and aunt 's arrival .
but they did pass away .
and mr. and mrs. gardiner , with their four children , did at length appear at longbourn .
the children .
two girls of six and eight years old .
and two younger boys .
were to be left under the particular care of their cousin jane .
who was the general favourite .
and whose steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every way .
teaching them , playing with them , and loving them .
the gardiners staid only one night at longbourn .
and set off the next morning with elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement .
one enjoyment was certain .
that of suitableness as companions .
a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear inconveniences .
cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure .
and affection and intelligence , which might supply it among themselves if there were disappointments abroad .
it is not the object of this work to give a description of derbyshire .
nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither lay .
oxford , blenheim , warwick , kenelworth , birmingham , & c. are sufficiently known .
a small part of derbyshire is all the present concern .
to the little town of lambton .
the scene of mrs. gardiner's former residence .
and where she had lately learned that some acquaintance still remained .
they bent their steps , after having seen all the principal wonders of the country .
and within five miles of lambton , elizabeth found from her aunt , that pemberley was situated .
it was not in their direct road , nor more than a mile or two out of it .
in talking over their route the evening before , mrs. gardiner expressed an inclination to see the place again .
mr. gardiner declared his willingness , and elizabeth was applied to for her approbation .
`` my love , should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so much ? ''
said her aunt .
`` a place too , with which so many of your acquaintance are connected .
wickham passed all his youth there , you know . ''
elizabeth was distressed .
she felt that she had no business at pemberley , and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it .
she must own that she was tired of great houses .
after going over so many , she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains .
mrs. gardiner abused her stupidity .
`` if it were merely a fine house richly furnished .
'' said she , `` i should not care about it myself .
but the grounds are delightful .
they have some of the finest woods in the country . ''
elizabeth said no more .
but her mind could not acquiesce .
the possibility of meeting mr. darcy , while viewing the place , instantly occurred .
it would be dreadful !
she blushed at the very idea .
and thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt , than to run such a risk .
but against this , there were objections .
and she finally resolved that it could be the last resource .
if her private enquiries as to the absence of the family , were unfavourably answered .
accordingly .
when she retired at night .
she asked the chambermaid whether pemberley were not a very fine place .
what was the name of its proprietor .
and with no little alarm , whether the family were down for the summer .
a most welcome negative followed the last question .
and her alarms being now removed .
she was at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself .
and when the subject was revived the next morning .
and she was again applied to .
could readily answer .
and with a proper air of indifference , that she had not really any dislike to the scheme .
to pemberley , therefore , they were to go .
end of the second volume .
[ illustration : matlock ] pride and prejudice : a novel .
in three volumes .
by the author of `` sense and sensibility . ''
vol .
iii .
london : printed for t. egerton , military library , whitehall .
1813 .
[ illustration : dove-dale ] pride & prejudice .
elizabeth , as they drove along , watched for the first appearance of pemberley woods with some perturbation .
and when at length they turned in at the lodge , her spirits were in a high flutter .
the park was very large , and contained great variety of ground .
they entered it in one of its lowest points .
and drove for some time through a beautiful wood , stretching over a wide extent .
elizabeth 's mind was too full for conversation .
but she saw and admired every remarkable spot and point of view .
they gradually ascended for half a mile .
and then found themselves at the top of a considerable eminence .
where the wood ceased .
and the eye was instantly caught by pemberley house .
situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound .
it was a large .
handsome .
stone building .
standing well on rising ground .
and backed by a ridge of high woody hills.. and in front .
a stream of some natural importance was swelled into greater , but without any artificial appearance .
its banks were neither formal , nor falsely adorned .
elizabeth was delighted .
she had never seen a place for which nature had done more .
or where natural beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste .
they were all of them warm in their admiration .
and at that moment she felt , that to be mistress of pemberley might be something !
they descended the hill , crossed the bridge , and drove to the door .
and , while examining the nearer aspect of the house , all her apprehensions of meeting its owner returned .
she dreaded lest the chambermaid had been mistaken .
on applying to see the place , they were admitted into the hall .
and elizabeth , as they waited for the housekeeper , had leisure to wonder at her being where she was .
the housekeeper came .
a respectable-looking .
elderly woman , much less fine , and more civil , than she had any notion of finding her .
they followed her into the dining-parlour .
it was a large , well-proportioned room , handsomely fitted up .
elizabeth , after slightly surveying it , went to a window to enjoy its prospect .
the hill .
crowned with wood .
from which they had descended , receiving increased abruptness from the distance , was a beautiful object .
every disposition of the ground was good .
and she looked on the whole scene .
the river .
the trees scattered on its banks .
and the winding of the valley , as far as she could trace it , with delight .
as they passed into other rooms , these objects were taking different positions .
but from every window there were beauties to be seen .
the rooms were lofty and handsome , and their furniture suitable to the fortune of their proprietor .
but elizabeth saw , with admiration of his taste , that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine .
with less of splendor , and more real elegance , than the furniture of rosings .
`` and of this place , '' thought she , `` i might have been mistress !
with these rooms i might now have been familiarly acquainted !
instead of viewing them as a stranger .
i might have rejoiced in them as my own .
and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt.. but no , '' .
recollecting herself , .
`` that could never be : my uncle and aunt would have been lost
to me : i should not have been allowed to invite them . ''
this was a lucky recollection .
it saved her from something like regret .
she longed to enquire of the housekeeper .
whether her master were really absent , but had not courage for it .
at length , however , the question was asked by her uncle .
and she turned away with alarm .
while mrs. reynolds replied .
that he was , adding , `` but we expect him to-morrow , with a large party of friends . ''
how rejoiced was elizabeth that their own journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day !
her aunt now called her to look at a picture .
she approached , and saw the likeness of mr. wickham suspended , amongst several other miniatures , over the mantle-piece .
her aunt asked her , smilingly , how she liked it .
the housekeeper came forward .
and told them it was the picture of a young gentleman .
the son of her late master 's steward .
who had been brought up by him at his own expence.. `` he is now gone into the army .
'' she added , `` but i am afraid he has turned out very wild . ''
mrs. gardiner looked at her niece with a smile , but elizabeth could not return it .
`` and that , '' said mrs. reynolds , pointing to another of the miniatures , '' is my master .
and very like him .
it was drawn at the same time as the other .
about eight years ago . ''
`` i have heard much of your master 's fine person .
'' said mrs. gardiner , looking at the picture .
`` it is a handsome face .
but , lizzy , you can tell us whether it is like or not . ''
mrs. reynolds 's respect for elizabeth seemed to increase on this intimation of her knowing her master .
`` does that young lady know mr .
darcy ? ''
elizabeth coloured , and said .
`` a little . ''
`` and do not you think him a very handsome gentleman , ma'am ? ''
`` yes , very handsome . ''
`` i am sure i know none so handsome .
but in the gallery up stairs you will see a finer , larger picture of him than this .
this room was my late master 's favourite room .
and these miniatures are just as they used to be then .
he was very fond of them . ''
this accounted to elizabeth for mr. wickham 's being among them .
mrs. reynolds then directed their attention to one of miss darcy , drawn when she was only eight years old .
`` and is miss darcy as handsome as her brother ? ''
said mr. gardiner .
`` oh !
yes .
the handsomest young lady that ever was seen .
and so accomplished ! .
she plays and sings all day long .
in the next room is a new instrument just come down for her .
a present from my master .
she comes here to-morrow with him . ''
mr. gardiner , whose manners were easy and pleasant , encouraged her communicativeness by his questions and remarks .
mrs. reynolds .
either from pride or attachment , had evidently great pleasure in talking of her master and his sister .
`` is your master much at pemberley in the course of the year ? ''
`` not so much as i could wish , sir .
but i dare say he may spend half his time here .
and miss darcy is always down for the summer months . ''
`` except , '' thought elizabeth , `` when she goes to ramsgate . ''
`` if your master would marry , you might see more of him . ''
`` yes , sir .
but i do not know when that will be .
i do not know who is good enough for him . ''
mr. and mrs. gardiner smiled .
elizabeth could not help saying .
`` it is very much to his credit , i am sure , that you should think so . ''
`` i say no more than the truth .
and what every body will say that knows him , '' replied the other .
elizabeth thought this was going pretty far .
and she listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added .
'' i have never had a cross word from him in my life .
and i have known him ever since he was four years old . ''
this was praise , of all others most extraordinary , most opposite to her ideas .
that he was not a good-tempered man , had been her firmest opinion .
her keenest attention was awakened .
she longed to hear more .
and was grateful to her uncle for saying .
`` there are very few people of whom so much can be said .
you are lucky in having such a master . ''
`` yes , sir , i know i am .
if i was to go through the world , i could not meet with a better .
but i have always observed , that they who are good-natured when children , are good-natured when they grow up .
and he was always the sweetest-tempered , most generous-hearted , boy in the world . ''
elizabeth almost stared at her.. `` can this be mr .
darcy ! ''
thought she .
`` his father was an excellent man , '' said mrs. gardiner .
`` yes , ma'am , that he was indeed .
and his son will be just like him .
just as affable to the poor . ''
elizabeth listened , wondered , doubted , and was impatient for more .
mrs. reynolds could interest her on no other point .
she related the subject of the pictures .
the dimensions of the rooms , and the price of the furniture , in vain .
mr. gardiner .
highly amused by the kind of family prejudice .
to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her master , soon led again to the subject .
and she dwelt with energy on his many merits , as they proceeded together up the great staircase .
`` he is the best landlord , and the best master , '' said she , `` that ever lived .
not like the wild young men now-a-days , who think of nothing but themselves .
there is not one of his tenants or servants but what will give him a good name .
some people call him proud .
but i am sure i never saw any thing of it .
to my fancy , it is only because he does not rattle away like other young men . ''
`` in what an amiable light does this place him ! ''
thought elizabeth .
`` this fine account of him .
'' whispered her aunt .
as they walked , `` is not quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend . ''
`` perhaps we might be deceived . ''
`` that is not very likely .
our authority was too good . ''
on reaching the spacious lobby above .
they were shewn into a very pretty sitting-room .
lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments below .
and were informed that it was but just done .
to give pleasure to miss darcy , who had taken a liking to the room , when last at pemberley .
`` he is certainly a good brother , '' said elizabeth , as she walked towards one of the windows .
mrs. reynolds anticipated miss darcy 's delight , when she should enter the room .
`` and this is always the way with him .
'' she added.. `` whatever can give his sister any pleasure , is sure to be done in a moment .
there is nothing he would not do for her . ''
the picture gallery , and two or three of the principal bed-rooms , were all that remained to be shewn .
in the former were many good paintings .
but elizabeth knew nothing of the art .
and from such as had been already visible below .
she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of miss darcy 's .
in crayons , whose subjects were usually more interesting , and also more intelligible .
in the gallery there were many family portraits .
but they could have little to fix the attention of a stranger .
elizabeth walked on in quest of the only face whose features would be known to her .
at last it arrested her .
and she beheld a striking resemblance of mr. darcy .
with such a smile over the face .
as she remembered to have sometimes seen , when he looked at her .
she stood several minutes before the picture in earnest contemplation .
and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery .
mrs. reynolds informed them , that it had been taken in his father 's life time .
there was certainly at this moment .
in elizabeth 's mind .
a more gentle sensation towards the original , than she had ever felt in the height of their acquaintance .
the commendation bestowed on him by mrs. reynolds was of no trifling nature .
what praise is more valuable than the praise of an intelligent servant ?
as a brother .
a landlord , a master , she considered how many people 's happiness were in his guardianship ! .
how much of pleasure or pain it was in his power to bestow ! .
how much of good or evil must be done by him !
every idea that had been brought forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character .
and as she stood before the canvas .
on which he was represented .
and fixed his eyes upon herself .
she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude than it had ever raised before .
she remembered its warmth , and softened its impropriety of expression .
when all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen .
they returned down stairs .
and taking leave of the housekeeper .
were consigned over to the gardener , who met them at the hall door .
as they walked across the lawn towards the river , elizabeth turned back to look again .
her uncle and aunt stopped also .
and while the former was conjecturing as to the date of the building .
the owner of it himself suddenly came forward from the road , which led behind it to the stables .
they were within twenty yards of each other .
and so abrupt was his appearance , that it was impossible to avoid his sight .
their eyes instantly met , and the cheeks of each were overspread with the deepest blush .
he absolutely started , and for a moment seemed immoveable from surprise .
but shortly recovering himself .
advanced towards the party .
and spoke to elizabeth , if not in terms of perfect composure , at least of perfect civility .
she had instinctively turned away .
but , stopping on his approach , received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be overcome .
had his first appearance .
or his resemblance to the picture they had just been examining .
been insufficient to assure the other two that they now saw mr. darcy .
the gardener 's expression of surprise , on beholding his master , must immediately have told it .
they stood a little aloof while he was talking to their niece .
who .
astonished and confused .
scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face .
and knew not what answer she returned to his civil enquiries after her family .
amazed at the alteration in his manner since they last parted .
every sentence that he uttered was increasing her embarrassment .
and every idea of the impropriety of her being found there .
recurring to her mind .
the few minutes in which they continued together , were some of the most uncomfortable of her life .
nor did he seem much more at ease .
when he spoke , his accent had none of its usual sedateness .
and he repeated his enquiries as to the time of her having left longbourn .
and of her stay in derbyshire .
so often , and in so hurried a way , as plainly spoke the distraction of his thoughts .
at length , every idea seemed to fail him .
and , after standing a few moments without saying a word , he suddenly recollected himself , and took leave .
the others then joined her , and expressed their admiration of his figure .
but elizabeth heard not a word , and , wholly engrossed by her own feelings , followed them in silence .
she was overpowered by shame and vexation .
her coming there was the most unfortunate , the most ill-judged thing in the world !
how strange must it appear to him !
in what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man !
it might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself in his way again !
oh !
why did she come ?
or , why did he thus come a day before he was expected ?
had they been only ten minutes sooner .
they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination .
for it was plain that he was that moment arrived , that moment alighted from his horse or his carriage .
she blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting .
and his behaviour , so strikingly altered , .
what could it mean ?
that he should even speak to her was amazing ! .
but to speak with such civility , to enquire after her family !
never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified .
never had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting .
what a contrast did it offer to his last address in rosing 's park .
when he put his letter into her hand !
she knew not what to think , nor how to account for it .
they had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water .
and every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground .
or a finer reach of the woods to which they were approaching .
but it was some time before elizabeth was sensible of any of it .
and .
though she answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt .
and seemed to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out .
she distinguished no part of the scene .
her thoughts were all fixed on that one spot of pemberley house .
whichever it might be , where mr. darcy then was .
she longed to know what at that moment was passing in his mind .
in what manner he thought of her .
and whether , in defiance of every thing , she was still dear to him .
perhaps he had been civil , only because he felt himself at ease .
yet there had been that in his voice , which was not like ease .
whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing her .
she could not tell , but he certainly had not seen her with composure .
at length .
however .
the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind roused her .
and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself .
they entered the woods .
and bidding adieu to the river for a while , ascended some of the higher grounds .
whence .
in spots where the opening of the trees gave the eye power to wander .
were many charming views of the valley .
the opposite hills , with the long range of woods overspreading many , and occasionally part of the stream .
mr. gardiner expressed a wish of going round the whole park , but feared it might be beyond a walk .
with a triumphant smile , they were told , that it was ten miles round .
it settled the matter .
and they pursued the accustomed circuit .
which brought them again .
after some time .
in a descent among hanging woods , to the edge of the water , in one of its narrowest parts .
they crossed it by a simple bridge , in character with the general air of the scene .
it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited .
and the valley .
here contracted into a glen .
allowed room only for the stream , and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it .
elizabeth longed to explore its windings .
but when they had crossed the bridge .
and perceived their distance from the house .
mrs. gardiner .
who was not a great walker .
could go no farther , and thought only of returning to the carriage as quickly as possible .
her niece was .
therefore .
obliged to submit .
and they took their way towards the house on the opposite side of the river , in the nearest direction .
but their progress was slow .
for mr. gardiner .
though seldom able to indulge the taste .
was very fond of fishing .
and was so much engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some trout in the water .
and talking to the man about them , that he advanced but little .
whilst wandering on in this slow manner .
they were again surprised .
and elizabeth 's astonishment was quite equal to what it had been at first .
by the sight of mr. darcy approaching them , and at no great distance .
the walk being here less sheltered than on the other side , allowed them to see him before they met .
elizabeth .
however astonished .
was at least more prepared for an interview than before .
and resolved to appear and to speak with calmness , if he really intended to meet them .
for a few moments , indeed , she felt that he would probably strike into some other path .
this idea lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view .
the turning past , he was immediately before them .
with a glance she saw , that he had lost none of his recent civility .
and .
to imitate his politeness , she began , as they met , to admire the beauty of the place .
but she had not got beyond the words `` delightful .
'' and `` charming .
'' when some unlucky recollections obtruded .
and she fancied that praise of pemberley from her , might be mischievously construed .
her colour changed , and she said no more .
mrs. gardiner was standing a little behind .
and on her pausing .
he asked her , if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends .
this was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared .
and she could hardly suppress a smile .
at his being now seeking the acquaintance of some of those very people .
against whom his pride had revolted , in his offer to herself .
`` what will be his surprise , '' thought she , `` when he knows who they are !
he takes them now for people of fashion . ''
the introduction , however , was immediately made .
and as she named their relationship to herself .
she stole a sly look at him , to see how he bore it .
and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he could from such disgraceful companions .
that he was surprised by the connexion was evident .
he sustained it however with fortitude .
and so far from going away , turned back with them , and entered into conversation with mr. gardiner .
elizabeth could not but be pleased , could not but triumph .
it was consoling , that he should know she had some relations for whom there was no need to blush .
she listened most attentively to all that passed between them .
and gloried in every expression .
every sentence of her uncle , which marked his intelligence , his taste , or his good manners .
the conversation soon turned upon fishing .
and she heard mr. darcy invite him .
with the greatest civility .
to fish there as often as he chose .
while he continued in the neighbourhood .
offering at the same time to supply him with fishing tackle .
and pointing out those parts of the stream where there was usually most sport .
mrs. gardiner , who was walking arm in arm with elizabeth , gave her a look expressive of her wonder .
elizabeth said nothing , but it gratified her exceedingly .
the compliment must be all for herself .
her astonishment , however , was extreme .
and continually was she repeating , `` why is he so altered ?
from what can it proceed ?
it can not be for me , it can not be for my sake that his manners are thus softened .
my reproofs at hunsford could not work such a change as this .
it is impossible that he should still love me . ''
after walking some time in this way .
the two ladies in front .
the two gentlemen behind .
on resuming their places .
after descending to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious water-plant .
there chanced to be a little alteration .
it originated in mrs. gardiner .
who .
fatigued by the exercise of the morning .
found elizabeth 's arm inadequate to her support , and consequently preferred her husband 's .
mr. darcy took her place by her niece , and they walked on together .
after a short silence , the lady first spoke .
she wished him to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the place .
and accordingly began by observing , that his arrival had been very unexpected .
`` for your housekeeper .
'' she added , `` informed us that you would certainly not be here till to-morrow .
and indeed , before we left bakewell , we understood that you were not immediately expected in the country . ''
he acknowledged the truth of it all .
and said that business with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few
hours before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling .
`` they will join me early to-morrow .
'' he continued , `` and among them are some who will claim an acquaintance with you , .
mr. bingley and his sisters . ''
elizabeth answered only by a slight bow .
her thoughts were instantly driven back to the time when mr. bingley 's name had been last mentioned between them .
and if she might judge from his complexion , his mind was not very differently engaged .
`` there is also one other person in the party .
'' he continued after a pause , `` who more particularly wishes to be known to you , .
will you allow me .
or do i ask too much , to introduce my sister to your acquaintance during your stay at lambton ? ''
the surprise of such an application was great indeed .
it was too great for her to know in what manner she acceded to it .
she immediately felt that whatever desire miss darcy might have of being acquainted with her .
must be the work of her brother , and without looking farther , it was satisfactory .
it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made him think really ill of her .
they now walked on in silence .
each of them deep in thought .
elizabeth was not comfortable .
that was impossible .
but she was flattered and pleased .
his wish of introducing his sister to her , was a compliment of the highest kind .
they soon outstripped the others .
and when they had reached the carriage , mr. and mrs. gardiner were half a quarter of a mile behind .
he then asked her to walk into the house .
but she declared herself not tired , and they stood together on the lawn .
at such a time , much might have been said , and silence was very awkward .
she wanted to talk , but there seemed an embargo on every subject .
at last she recollected that she had been travelling .
and they talked of matlock and dove dale with great perseverance .
yet time and her aunt moved slowly .
and her patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the tête-à-tête was over .
on mr. and mrs. gardiner 's coming up .
they were all pressed to go into the house and take some refreshment .
but this was declined , and they parted on each side with the utmost politeness .
mr. darcy handed the ladies into the carriage .
and when it drove off , elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards the house .
the observations of her uncle and aunt now began .
and each of them pronounced him to be infinitely superior to any thing they had expected .
`` he is perfectly well behaved , polite , and unassuming , '' said her uncle .
`` there is something a little stately in him to be sure .
'' replied her aunt , `` but it is confined to his air , and is not unbecoming .
i can now say with the housekeeper .
that though some people may call him proud , i have seen nothing of it . ''
`` i was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us .
it was more than civil .
it was really attentive .
and there was no necessity for such attention .
his acquaintance with elizabeth was very trifling . ''
`` to be sure , lizzy , '' said her aunt , `` he is not so handsome as wickham .
or rather he has not wickham 's countenance , for his features are perfectly good .
but how came you to tell us that he was so disagreeable ? ''
elizabeth excused herself as well as she could .
said that she had liked him better when they met in kent than before .
and that she had never seen him so pleasant as this morning .
`` but perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities , '' replied her uncle .
`` your great men often are .
and therefore i shall not take him at his word about fishing .
as he might change his mind another day , and warn me off his grounds . ''
elizabeth felt that they had entirely mistaken his character , but said nothing .
`` from what we have seen of him .
'' continued mrs. gardiner .
`` i really should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by any body .
as he has done by poor wickham .
he has not an ill-natured look .
on the contrary , there is something pleasing about his mouth when he speaks .
and there is something of dignity in his countenance .
that would not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart .
but to be sure .
the good lady who shewed us the house , did give him a most flaming character !
i could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes .
but he is a liberal master .
i suppose , and that in the eye of a servant comprehends every virtue . ''
elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of his behaviour to wickham .
and therefore gave them to understand .
in as guarded a manner as she could .
that by what she had heard from his relations in kent .
his actions were capable of a very different construction .
and that his character was by no means so faulty .
nor wickham 's so amiable , as they had been considered in hertfordshire .
in confirmation of this .
she related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions in which they had been connected .
without actually naming her authority , but stating it to be such as might be relied on .
mrs. gardiner was surprised and concerned .
but as they were now approaching the scene of her former pleasures .
every idea gave way to the charm of recollection .
and she was too much engaged in pointing out to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs .
to think of any thing else .
fatigued as she had been by the morning 's walk .
they had no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former acquaintance .
and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an intercourse renewed after many years discontinuance .
the occurrences of the day were too full of interest to
leave elizabeth much attention for any of these new friends .
and she could do nothing but think .
and think with wonder .
of mr. darcy 's civility , and above all , of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister .
elizabeth had settled it that mr. darcy would bring his sister to visit her .
the very day after her reaching pemberley .
and was consequently resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning .
but her conclusion was false .
for on the very morning after their own arrival at lambton , these visitors came .
they had been walking about the place with some of their new friends .
and were just returned to the inn to dress themselves for dining with the same family .
when the sound of a carriage drew them to a window .
and they saw a gentleman and lady in a curricle , driving up the street .
elizabeth immediately recognising the livery .
guessed what it meant .
and imparted no small degree of surprise to her relations , by acquainting them with the honour which she expected .
her uncle and aunt were all amazement .
and the embarrassment of her manner as she spoke .
joined to the circumstance itself .
and many of the circumstances of the preceding day , opened to them a new idea on the business .
nothing had ever suggested it before .
but they now felt that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a quarter .
than by supposing a partiality for their niece .
while these newly-born notions were passing in their heads , the perturbation of elizabeth 's feelings was every moment increasing .
she was quite amazed at her own discomposure .
but amongst other causes of disquiet .
she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much in her favour .
and more than commonly anxious to please , she naturally suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her .
she retreated from the window , fearful of being seen .
and as she walked up and down the room .
endeavouring to compose herself .
saw such looks of enquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt , as made every thing worse .
miss darcy and her brother appeared , and this formidable introduction took place .
with astonishment did elizabeth see , that her new acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself .
since her being at lambton , she had heard that miss darcy was exceedingly proud .
but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her , that she was only exceedingly shy .
she found it difficult to obtain even a word from her beyond a monosyllable .
miss darcy was tall , and on a larger scale than elizabeth .
and , though little more than sixteen , her figure was formed , and her appearance womanly and graceful .
she was less handsome than her brother .
but there was sense and good humour in her face , and her manners were perfectly unassuming and gentle .
elizabeth .
who had expected to find in her as acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever mr. darcy had been .
was much relieved by discerning such different feelings .
they had not been long together , before darcy told her that bingley was also coming to wait on her .
and she had barely time to express her satisfaction .
and prepare for such a visitor .
when bingley 's quick step was heard on the stairs , and in a moment he entered the room .
all elizabeth 's anger against him had been long done away .
but .
had she still felt any .
it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected cordiality with which he expressed himself .
on seeing her again .
he enquired in a friendly .
though general way .
after her family , and looked and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done .
to mr. and mrs. gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage than to herself .
they had long wished to see him .
the whole party before them , indeed , excited a lively attention .
the suspicions which had just arisen of mr. darcy and their niece .
directed their observation towards each with an earnest , though guarded , enquiry .
and they soon drew from those enquiries the full conviction that
one of them at least knew what it was to love .
of the lady 's sensations they remained a little in doubt .
but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was evident enough .
elizabeth , on her side , had much to do .
she wanted to ascertain the feelings of each of her visitors .
she wanted to compose her own , and to make herself agreeable to all .
and in the latter object .
where she feared most to fail .
she was most sure of success .
for those to whom she endeavoured to give pleasure were prepossessed in her favour .
bingley was ready , georgiana was eager , and darcy determined , to be pleased .
in seeing bingley , her thoughts naturally flew to her sister .
and oh !
how ardently did she long to know , whether any of his were directed in a like manner .
sometimes she could fancy .
that he talked less than on former occasions .
and once or twice pleased herself with the notion that as he looked at her .
he was trying to trace a resemblance .
but .
though this might be imaginary .
she could not be deceived as to his behaviour to miss darcy .
who had been set up as a rival of jane .
no look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard .
nothing occurred between them that could justify the hopes of his sister .
on this point she was soon satisfied .
and two or three little circumstances occurred ere they parted .
which .
in her anxious interpretation .
denoted a recollection of jane .
not untinctured by tenderness .
and a wish of saying more that might lead to the mention of her , had he dared .
he observed to her .
at a moment when the others were talking together .
and in a tone which had something of real regret .
that it `` was a very long time since he had had the pleasure of seeing her . ''
and , before she could reply , he added , `` it is above eight months .
we have not met since the 26th of november , when we were all dancing together at netherfield . ''
elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact .
and he afterwards took occasion to ask her .
when unattended to by any of the rest , whether all her sisters were at longbourn .
there was not much in the question .
nor in the preceding remark , but there was a look and a manner which gave them meaning .
it was not often that she could turn her eyes on mr. darcy himself .
but .
whenever she did catch a glimpse .
she saw an expression of general complaisance .
and in all that he said .
she heard an accent so far removed from hauteur or disdain of his companions .
as convinced her that the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed .
however temporary its existence might prove , had at least outlived one day .
when she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance .
and courting the good opinion of people .
with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a disgrace .
when she saw him thus civil .
not only to herself .
but to the very relations whom he had openly disdained .
and recollected their last lively scene in hunsford parsonage .
the difference .
the change was so great .
and struck so forcibly on her mind , that she could hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible .
never .
even in the company of his dear friends at netherfield .
or his dignified relations at rosings .
had she seen him so desirous to please .
so free from self-consequence .
or unbending reserve as now .
when no importance could result from the success of his endeavours .
and when even the acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed .
would draw down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of netherfield and rosings .
their visitors staid with them above half an hour .
and when they arose to depart .
mr. darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing their wish of seeing mr. and mrs. gardiner .
and miss bennet , to dinner at pemberley , before they left the country .
miss darcy , though with a diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations , readily obeyed .
mrs. gardiner looked at her niece .
desirous of knowing how she .
whom the invitation most concerned , felt disposed as to its acceptance , but elizabeth had turned away her head .
presuming , however .
that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment .
than any dislike of the proposal .
and seeing in her husband .
who was fond of society .
a perfect willingness to accept it .
she ventured to engage for her attendance , and the day after the next was fixed on .
bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing elizabeth again .
having still a great deal to say to her , and many enquiries to make after all their hertfordshire friends .
elizabeth , construing all this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister , was pleased .
and on this account .
as well as some others .
found herself .
when their visitors left them .
capable of considering the last half hour with some satisfaction .
though while it was passing , the enjoyment of it had been little .
eager to be alone .
and fearful of enquiries or hints from her uncle and aunt .
she staid with them only long enough to hear their favourable opinion of bingley .
and then hurried away to dress .
but she had no reason to fear mr. and mrs. gardiner 's curiosity .
it was not their wish to force her communication .
it was evident that she was much better acquainted with mr. darcy than they had before any idea of .
it was evident that he was very much in love with her .
they saw much to interest , but nothing to justify enquiry .
of mr. darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well .
and , as far as their acquaintance reached , there was no fault to find .
they could not be untouched by his politeness .
and had they drawn his character from their own feelings .
and his servant 's report .
without any reference to any other account .
the circle in hertfordshire to which he was known , would not have recognised it for mr. darcy .
there was now an interest , however , in believing the housekeeper .
and they soon became sensible .
that the authority of a servant who had known him since he was four years old .
and whose own manners indicated respectability , was not to be hastily rejected .
neither had any thing occurred in the intelligence of their lambton friends , that could materially lessen its weight .
they had nothing to accuse him of but pride .
pride he probably had .
and if not .
it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market-town , where the family did not visit .
it was acknowledged , however , that he was a liberal man , and did much good among the poor .
with respect to wickham , the travellers soon found that he was not held there in much estimation .
for though the chief of his concerns .
with the son of his patron .
were imperfectly understood .
it was yet a well known fact that .
on his quitting derbyshire , he had left many debts behind him , which mr. darcy afterwards discharged .
as for elizabeth , her thoughts were at pemberley this evening more than the last .
and the evening .
though as it passed it seemed long .
was not long enough to determine her feelings towards one in that mansion .
and she lay awake two whole hours , endeavouring to make them out .
she certainly did not hate him .
no .
hatred had vanished long ago .
and she had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him .
that could be so called .
the respect created by the conviction of his valuable qualities .
though at first unwillingly admitted , had for some time ceased to be repugnant to her feelings .
and it was now heightened into somewhat of a friendlier nature .
by the testimony so highly in his favour .
and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light , which yesterday had produced .
but above all .
above respect and esteem , there was a motive within her of good will which could not be overlooked .
it was gratitude.. gratitude .
not merely for having once loved her .
but for loving her still well enough .
to forgive all the petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him .
and all the unjust accusations accompanying her rejection .
he who , she had been persuaded .
would avoid her as his greatest enemy .
seemed .
on this accidental meeting .
most eager to preserve the acquaintance .
and without any indelicate display of regard .
or any peculiarity of manner .
where their two selves only were concerned .
was soliciting the good opinion of her friends , and bent on making her known to his sister .
such a change in a man of so much pride , excited not only astonishment but gratitude .
for to love , ardent love , it must be attributed .
and as such its impression on her was of a sort to be encouraged .
as by no means unpleasing , though it could not be exactly defined .
she respected , she esteemed , she was grateful to him , she felt a real interest in his welfare .
and she only wanted to know how far she wished that welfare to depend upon herself .
and how far it would be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power .
which her fancy told her she still possessed , of bringing on the renewal of his addresses .
it had been settled in the evening .
between the aunt and niece .
that such a striking civility as miss darcy 's .
in coming to them on the very day of her arrival at pemberley .
for she had reached it only to a late breakfast .
ought to be imitated , though it could not be equalled , by some exertion of politeness on their side .
and , consequently , that it would be highly expedient to wait on her at pemberley the following morning .
they were .
therefore .
to go.. elizabeth was pleased .
though , when she asked herself the reason , she had very little to say in reply .
mr. gardiner left them soon after breakfast .
the fishing scheme had been renewed the day before .
and a positive engagement made of his meeting some of the gentlemen at pemberley by noon .
convinced as elizabeth now was that miss bingley 's dislike of her had originated in jealousy .
she could not help feeling how very unwelcome her appearance at pemberley must be to her .
and was curious to know with how much civility on that lady 's side .
the acquaintance would now be renewed .
on reaching the house .
they were shewn through the hall into the saloon , whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer .
its windows opening to the ground .
admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody hills behind the house .
and of the beautiful oaks and spanish chesnuts which were scattered over the intermediate lawn .
in this room they were received by miss darcy .
who was sitting there with mrs. hurst and miss bingley , and the lady with whom she lived in london .
georgiana 's reception of them was very civil .
but attended with all that embarrassment which .
though proceeding from shyness and the fear of doing wrong .
would easily give to those who felt themselves inferior , the belief of her being proud and reserved .
mrs. gardiner and her niece , however , did her justice , and pitied her .
by mrs. hurst and miss bingley , they were noticed only by a curtsey .
and on their being seated .
a pause , awkward as such pauses must always be , succeeded for a few moments .
it was first broken by mrs. annesley .
a genteel .
agreeable-looking woman .
whose endeavour to introduce some kind of discourse .
proved her to be more truly well bred than either of the others .
and between her and mrs. gardiner , with occasional help from elizabeth , the conversation was carried on .
miss darcy looked as if she wished for courage enough to join in it .
and sometimes did venture a short sentence , when there was least danger of its being heard .
elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by miss bingley .
and that she could not speak a word , especially to miss darcy , without calling her attention .
this observation would not have prevented her from trying to talk to the latter .
had they not been seated at an inconvenient distance .
but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity of saying much .
her own thoughts were employing her .
she expected every moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room .
she wished , she feared that the master of the house might be amongst them .
and whether she wished or feared it most , she could scarcely determine .
after sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour .
without hearing miss bingley 's voice .
elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold enquiry after the health of her family .
she answered with equal indifference and brevity , and the other said no more .
the next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the entrance of servants with cold meat .
cake , and a variety of all the finest fruits in season .
but this did not take place till after many a significant look
and smile from mrs. annesley to miss darcy had been given .
to remind her of her post .
there was now employment for the whole party .
for though they could not all talk , they could all eat .
and the beautiful pyramids of grapes , nectarines , and peaches , soon collected them round the table .
while thus engaged .
elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether she most feared or wished for the appearance of mr. darcy .
by the feelings which prevailed on his entering the room .
and then .
though but a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate , she began to regret that he came .
he had been some time with mr. gardiner .
who .
with two or three other gentlemen from the house .
was engaged by the river .
and had left him only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to georgiana that morning .
no sooner did he appear .
than elizabeth wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed.. a resolution the more necessary to be made .
but perhaps not the more easily kept .
because she saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them .
and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour when he first came into the room .
in no countenance was attentive curiosity so strongly marked as in miss bingley 's .
in spite of the smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its objects .
for jealousy had not yet made her desperate , and her attentions to mr. darcy were by no means over .
miss darcy , on her brother's entrance , exerted herself much more to talk .
and elizabeth saw that he was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted .
and forwarded , as much as possible , every attempt at conversation on either side .
miss bingley saw all this likewise .
and .
in the imprudence of anger .
took the first opportunity of saying , with sneering civility , `` pray , miss eliza , are not the .
.
shire militia removed from meryton ?
they must be a great loss to your family . ''
in darcy 's presence she dared not mention wickham 's name .
but elizabeth instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts .
and the various recollections connected with him gave her a moment 's distress .
but .
exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack , she presently answered the question in a tolerably disengaged tone .
while she spoke .
an involuntary glance shewed her darcy with an heightened complexion .
earnestly looking at her , and his sister overcome with confusion , and unable to lift up her eyes .
had miss bingley known what pain she was then giving her beloved friend .
she undoubtedly would have refrained from the hint .
but she had merely intended to discompose elizabeth .
by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed her partial .
to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in darcy 's opinion .
and perhaps to remind the latter of all the follies and absurdities .
by which some part of her family were connected with that corps .
not a syllable had ever reached her of miss darcy 's meditated elopement .
to no creature had it been revealed , where secresy was possible , except to elizabeth .
and from all bingley 's connections her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it .
from that very wish which elizabeth had long ago attributed to him , of their becoming hereafter her own .
he had certainly formed such a plan .
and without meaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate him from miss bennet .
it is probable that it might add something to his lively concern for the welfare of his friend .
elizabeth 's collected behaviour , however , soon quieted his emotion .
and as miss bingley .
vexed and disappointed .
dared not approach nearer to wickham .
georgiana also recovered in time , though not enough to be able to speak any more .
her brother .
whose eye she feared to meet .
scarcely recollected her interest in the affair .
and the very circumstance which had been designed to turn his thoughts from elizabeth .
seemed to have fixed them on her more , and more cheerfully .
their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above-mentioned .
and while mr. darcy was attending them to their carriage .
miss bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on elizabeth 's person , behaviour , and dress .
but georgiana would not join her .
her brother 's recommendation was enough to ensure her favour : his judgment could not err .
and he had spoken in such terms of elizabeth .
as to leave georgiana without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and amiable .
when darcy returned to the saloon .
miss bingley could not help repeating to him some part of what she had been saying to his sister .
`` how very ill eliza bennet looks this morning , mr. darcy , '' she cried .
`` i never in my life saw any one so much altered as she is since the winter .
she is grown so brown and coarse !
louisa and i were agreeing that we should not have known her again . ''
however little mr. darcy might have liked such an address .
he contented himself with coolly replying , that he perceived no other alteration than her being rather tanned , .
no miraculous consequence of travelling in the summer .
`` for my own part .
'' she rejoined , `` i must confess that i never could see any beauty in her .
her face is too thin .
her complexion has no brilliancy .
and her features are not at all handsome .
her nose wants character .
there is nothing marked in its lines .
her teeth are tolerable , but not out of the common way .
and as for her eyes .
which have sometimes been called so fine , i never could perceive any thing extraordinary in them .
they have a sharp , shrewish look , which i do not like at all .
and in her air altogether , there is a self-sufficiency without fashion , which is intolerable . ''
persuaded as miss bingley was that darcy admired elizabeth , this was not the best method of recommending herself .
but angry people are not always wise .
and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled , she had all the success she expected .
he was resolutely silent however .
and .
from a determination of making him speak .
she continued .
`` i remember .
when we first knew her in hertfordshire .
how amazed we all were to find that she was a reputed beauty .
and i particularly recollect your saying one night .
after they had been dining at netherfield , 'she a beauty ! .
i should as soon call her mother a wit . '
but afterwards she seemed to improve on you .
and i believe you thought her rather pretty at one time . ''
`` yes .
'' replied darcy .
who could contain himself no longer .
`` but that was only when i first knew her .
for it is many months since i have considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance . ''
he then went away .
and miss bingley was left to all the satisfaction of having forced
him to say what gave no one any pain but herself .
mrs. gardiner and elizabeth talked of all that had occurred .
during their visit , as they returned , except what had particularly interested them both .
the looks and behaviour of every body they had seen were discussed .
except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention .
they talked of his sister , his friends , his house , his fruit , of every thing but himself .
yet elizabeth was longing to know what mrs. gardiner thought of him .
and mrs. gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece 's beginning the subject .
elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from jane .
on their first arrival at lambton .
and this disappointment had been renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there .
but on the third .
her repining was over .
and her sister justified by the receipt of two letters from her at once .
on one of which was marked that it had been missent elsewhere .
elizabeth was not surprised at it .
as jane had written the direction remarkably ill. they had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in .
and her uncle and aunt , leaving her to enjoy them in quiet , set off by themselves .
the one missent must be first attended to .
it had been written five days ago .
the beginning contained an account of all their little parties and engagements , with such news as the country afforded .
but the latter half .
which was dated a day later , and written in evident agitation , gave more important intelligence .
it was to this effect : `` since writing the above .
dearest lizzy , something has occurred of a most unexpected and serious nature .
but i am afraid of alarming you .
be assured that we are all well .
what i have to say relates to poor lydia .
an express came at twelve last night .
just as we were all gone to bed .
from colonel forster , to inform us that she was gone off to scotland with one of his officers .
to own the truth , with wickham ! .
imagine our surprise .
to kitty , however , it does not seem so wholly unexpected .
i am very , very sorry .
so imprudent a match on both sides ! .
but i am willing to hope the best , and that his character has been misunderstood .
thoughtless and indiscreet i can easily believe him .
but this step ( and let us rejoice over it ) marks nothing bad at heart .
his choice is disinterested at least , for he must know my father can give her nothing .
our poor mother is sadly grieved .
my father bears it better .
how thankful am i , that we never let them know what has been said against him .
we must forget it ourselves .
they were off saturday night about twelve .
as is conjectured , but were not missed till yesterday morning at eight .
the express was sent off directly .
my dear lizzy , they must have passed within ten miles of us .
colonel forster gives us reason to expect him here soon .
lydia left a few lines for his wife , informing her of their intention .
i must conclude , for i can not be long from my poor mother .
i am afraid you will not be able to make it out .
but i hardly know what i have written . ''
without allowing herself time for consideration .
and scarcely knowing what she felt .
elizabeth on finishing this letter .
instantly seized the other .
and opening it with the utmost impatience .
read as follows : it had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first .
`` by this time , my dearest sister , you have received my hurried letter .
i wish this may be more intelligible .
but though not confined for time , my head is so bewildered that i can not answer for being coherent .
dearest lizzy .
i hardly know what i would write .
but i have bad news for you , and it can not be delayed .
imprudent as a marriage between mr. wickham and our poor lydia would be .
we are now anxious to be assured it has taken place .
for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone to scotland .
colonel forster came yesterday , having left brighton the day before , not many hours after the express .
though lydia 's short letter to mrs. f. gave them to understand that they were going to gretna green .
something was dropped by denny expressing his belief that w. never intended to go there .
or to marry lydia at all .
which was repeated to colonel f. who instantly taking the alarm .
set off from b. intending to trace their route .
he did trace them easily to clapham , but no farther .
for on entering that place they removed into a hackney-coach and dismissed the chaise that brought them from epsom .
all that is known after this is , that they were seen to continue the london road .
i know not what to think .
after making every possible enquiry on that side london .
colonel f. came on into hertfordshire .
anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes .
and at the inns in barnet and hatfield .
but without any success , no such people had been seen to pass through .
with the kindest concern he came on to longbourn .
and broke his apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to his heart .
i am sincerely grieved for him and mrs. f. but no one can throw any blame on them .
our distress , my dear lizzy , is very great .
my father and mother believe the worst , but i can not think so ill of him .
many circumstances might make it more eligible for them to be
married privately in town than to pursue their first plan .
and even if he could form such a design against a young woman of lydia 's connections .
which is not likely , can i suppose her so lost to every thing ? .
impossible .
i grieve to find , however , that colonel f. is not disposed to depend upon their marriage .
he shook his head when i expressed my hopes .
and said he feared w. was not a man to be trusted .
my poor mother is really ill and keeps her room .
could she exert herself it would be better , but this is not to be expected .
and as to my father , i never in my life saw him so affected .
poor kitty has anger for having concealed their attachment .
but as it was a matter of confidence one can not wonder .
i am truly glad , dearest lizzy , that you have been spared something of these distressing scenes .
but now as the first shock is over , shall i own that i long for your return ?
i am not so selfish , however , as to press for it , if inconvenient .
adieu .
i take up my pen again to do .
what i have just told you i would not .
but circumstances are such .
that i can not help earnestly begging you all to come here , as soon as possible .
i know my dear uncle and aunt so well .
that i am not afraid of requesting it , though i have still something more to ask of the former .
my father is going to london with colonel forster instantly , to try to discover her .
what he means to do , i am sure i know not .
but his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any measure in the best and safest way .
and colonel forster is obliged to be at brighton again to-morrow evening .
in such an exigence my uncle 's advice and assistance would be every thing in the world .
he will immediately comprehend what i must feel , and i rely upon his goodness . ''
`` oh !
where , where is my uncle ? ''
cried elizabeth .
darting from her seat as she finished the letter .
in eagerness to follow him , without losing a moment of the time so precious .
but as she reached the door , it was opened by a servant , and mr. darcy appeared .
her pale face and impetuous manner made him start .
and before he could recover himself enough to speak .
she .
in whose mind every idea was superseded by lydia's situation .
hastily exclaimed , `` i beg your pardon , but i must leave you .
i must find mr. gardiner this moment , on business that can not be delayed .
i have not an instant to lose . ''
`` good god !
what is the matter ? ''
cried he , with more feeling than politeness .
then recollecting himself .
`` i will not detain you a minute .
but let me , or let the servant , go after mr. and mrs. gardiner .
you are not well enough.. you can not go yourself . ''
elizabeth hesitated .
but her knees trembled under her .
and she felt how little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them .
calling back the servant .
therefore .
she commissioned him .
though in so breathless an accent as made her almost unintelligible .
to fetch his master and mistress home , instantly .
on his quitting the room .
she sat down .
unable to support herself .
and looking so miserably ill .
that it was impossible for darcy to leave her .
or to refrain from saying , in a tone of gentleness and commiseration , '' let me call your maid .
is there nothing you could take , to give you present relief ? .
a glass of wine.. shall i get you one ? .
you are very ill. '' `` no , i thank you . ''
she replied , endeavouring to recover herself .
`` there is nothing the matter with me .
i am quite well .
i am only distressed by some dreadful news which i have just received from longbourn . ''
she burst into tears as she alluded to it , and for a few minutes could not speak another word .
darcy .
in wretched suspense , could only say something indistinctly of his concern , and observe her in compassionate silence .
at length , she spoke again .
`` i have just had a letter from jane , with such dreadful news .
it can not be concealed from any one .
my youngest sister has left all her friends .
has eloped.. has thrown herself into the power of .
of mr. wickham .
they are gone off together from brighton .
you know him too well to doubt the rest .
she has no money , no connections , nothing that can tempt him to .
she is lost for ever . ''
darcy was fixed in astonishment .
`` when i consider .
'' she added , in a yet more agitated voice , `` that i might have prevented it ! .
i who knew what he was .
had i but explained some part of it only .
some part of what i learnt , to my own family !
had his character been known , this could not have happened .
but it is all , all too late now . ''
`` i am grieved , indeed , '' cried darcy .
`` grieved .
shocked .
but is it certain , absolutely certain ? ''
`` oh yes ! .
they left brighton together on sunday night , and were traced almost to london , but not beyond .
they are certainly not gone to scotland . ''
`` and what has been done , what has been attempted , to recover her ? ''
`` my father is gone to london .
and jane has written to beg my uncle's immediate assistance .
and we shall be off , i hope , in half an hour .
but nothing can be done .
i know very well that nothing can be done .
how is such a man to be worked on ?
how are they even to be discovered ?
i have not the smallest hope .
it is every way horrible ! ''
darcy shook his head in silent acquiesence .
`` when my eyes were opened to his real character.. oh !
had i known what i ought , what i dared , to do !
but i knew not .
i was afraid of doing too much .
wretched , wretched , mistake ! ''
darcy made no answer .
he seemed scarcely to hear her , and was walking up and down the room in earnest meditation .
his brow contracted , his air gloomy .
elizabeth soon observed , and instantly understood it .
her power was sinking .
every thing must sink under such a proof of family weakness , such an assurance of the deepest disgrace .
she could neither wonder nor condemn .
but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing consolatory to her bosom , afforded no palliation of her distress .
it was , on the contrary , exactly calculated to make her understand her own wishes .
and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved him .
as now , when all love must be vain .
but self , though it would intrude , could not engross her .
lydia .
the humiliation , the misery , she was bringing on them all , soon swallowed up every private care .
and covering her face with her handkerchief , elizabeth was soon lost to every thing else .
and , after a pause of several minutes .
was only recalled to a sense of her situation by the voice of her companion .
who , in a manner .
which though it spoke compassion .
spoke likewise restraint .
said .
`` i am afraid you have been long desiring my absence .
nor have i any thing to plead in excuse of my stay , but real , though unavailing , concern .
would to heaven that any thing could be either said or done on my part .
that might offer consolation to such distress.. but i will not torment you with vain wishes .
which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks .
this unfortunate affair will .
i fear , prevent my sister 's having the pleasure of seeing you at pemberley to-day . ''
`` oh , yes .
be so kind as to apologize for us to miss darcy .
say that urgent business calls us home immediately .
conceal the unhappy truth as long as it is possible.. i know it can not be long . ''
he readily assured her of his secrecy .
again expressed his sorrow for her distress .
wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present reason to hope .
and leaving his compliments for her relations , with only one serious , parting , look , went away .
as he quitted the room .
elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they should ever see each other again
on such terms of cordiality as had marked their several meetings in derbyshire .
and as she threw a retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance .
so full of contradictions and varieties .
sighed at the perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted its continuance .
and would formerly have rejoiced in its termination .
if gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection , elizabeth's change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty .
but if otherwise .
if the regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or unnatural .
in comparison of what is so often described as arising on a first interview with its object .
and even before two words have been exchanged .
nothing can be said in her defence .
except that she had given somewhat of a trial to the latter method .
in her partiality for wickham .
and that its ill-success might perhaps authorise her to seek the other less interesting mode of attachment .
be that as it may , she saw him go with regret .
and in this early example of what lydia 's infamy must produce .
found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched business .
never .
since reading jane 's second letter , had she entertained a hope of wickham 's meaning to marry her .
no one but jane , she thought , could flatter herself with such an expectation .
surprise was the least of her feelings on this developement .
while the contents of the first letter remained on her mind , she was all surprise .
all astonishment that wickham should marry a girl , whom it was impossible he could marry for money .
and how lydia could ever have attached him , had appeared incomprehensible .
but now it was all too natural .
for such an attachment as this , she might have sufficient charms .
and though she did not suppose lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement .
without the intention of marriage .
she had no difficulty in believing that neither her virtue nor
her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy prey .
she had never perceived .
while the regiment was in hertfordshire .
that lydia had any partiality for him .
but she was convinced that lydia had wanted only encouragement to attach herself to any body .
sometimes one officer , sometimes another had been her favourite , as their attentions raised them in her opinion .
her affections had been continually fluctuating , but never without an object .
the mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a girl.. oh !
how acutely did she now feel it .
she was wild to be at home .
to hear .
to see .
to be upon the spot .
to share with jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her , in a family so deranged .
a father absent , a mother incapable of exertion , and requiring constant attendance .
and though almost persuaded that nothing could be done for lydia .
her uncle 's interference seemed of the utmost importance .
and till he entered the room , the misery of her impatience was severe .
mr. and mrs. gardiner had hurried back in alarm .
supposing .
by the servant 's account .
that their niece was taken suddenly ill.. but satisfying them instantly on that head .
she eagerly communicated the cause of their summons .
reading the two letters aloud .
and dwelling on the postscript of the last .
with trembling energy.. though lydia had never been a favourite with them .
mr. and mrs. gardiner could not but be deeply affected .
not lydia only , but all were concerned in it .
and after the first exclamations of surprise and horror .
mr. gardiner readily promised every assistance in his power.. elizabeth .
though expecting no less , thanked him with tears of gratitude .
and all three being actuated by one spirit , every thing relating to their journey was speedily settled .
they were to be off as soon as possible .
`` but what is to be done about pemberley ? ''
cried mrs. gardiner .
`` john told us mr. darcy was here when you sent for us.. was it so ? ''
`` yes .
and i told him we should not be able to keep our engagement .
that is all settled . ''
`` that is all settled . ''
repeated the other , as she ran into her room to prepare .
`` and are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real truth !
oh , that i knew how it was ! ''
but wishes were vain .
or at best could serve only to amuse her in the hurry and confusion of the following hour .
had elizabeth been at leisure to be idle .
she would have remained certain that all employment was impossible to one so wretched as herself .
but she had her share of business as well as her aunt .
and amongst the rest there were notes to be written to all their friends in lambton .
with false excuses for their sudden departure .
an hour , however , saw the whole completed .
and mr. gardiner meanwhile having settled his account at the inn , nothing remained to be done but to go .
and elizabeth .
after all the misery of the morning .
found herself .
in a shorter space of time than she could have supposed .
seated in the carriage , and on the road to longbourn .
`` i have been thinking it over again .
elizabeth , '' said her uncle , as they drove from the town .
`` and really .
upon serious consideration .
i am much more inclined than i was to judge as your eldest sister does of the matter .
it appears to me so very unlikely .
that any young man should form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or friendless .
and who was actually staying in his colonel 's family , that i am strongly inclined to hope the best .
could he expect that her friends would not step forward ?
could he expect to be noticed again by the regiment , after such an affront to colonel forster ?
his temptation is not adequate to the risk . ''
`` do you really think so ? ''
cried elizabeth , brightening up for a moment .
`` upon my word , '' said mrs. gardiner , `` i begin to be of your uncle's opinion .
it is really too great a violation of decency .
honour , and interest , for him to be guilty of it .
i can not think so very ill of wickham .
can you .
yourself , lizzy , so wholly give him up , as to believe him capable of it ? ''
`` not perhaps of neglecting his own interest .
but of every other neglect i can believe him capable .
if , indeed , it should be so !
but i dare not hope it .
why should they not go on to scotland , if that had been the case ? ''
`` in the first place .
'' replied mr. gardiner , `` there is no absolute proof that they are not gone to scotland . ''
`` oh !
but their removing from the chaise into an hackney coach is such a presumption !
and , besides , no traces of them were to be found on the barnet road . ''
`` well , then .
supposing them to be in london .
they may be there , though for the purpose of concealment , for no more exceptionable purpose .
it is not likely that money should be very abundant on either side .
and it might strike them that they could be more economically .
though less expeditiously , married in london , than in scotland . ''
`` but why all this secrecy ?
why any fear of detection ?
why must their marriage be private ?
oh !
no , no , this is not likely .
his most particular friend .
you see by jane 's account , was persuaded of his never intending to marry her .
wickham will never marry a woman without some money .
he can not afford it .
and what claims has lydia .
what attractions has she beyond youth .
health .
and good humour .
that could make him for her sake , forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well ?
as to what restraint the apprehension of disgrace in the corps might throw on a dishonourable elopement with her .
i am not able to judge .
for i know nothing of the effects that such a step might produce .
but as to your other objection , i am afraid it will hardly hold good .
lydia has no brothers to step forward .
and he might imagine .
from my father's behaviour .
from his indolence and the little attention he has ever seemed
to give to what was going forward in his family .
that he would do as little .
and think as little about it , as any father could do , in such a matter . ''
`` but can you think that lydia is so lost to every thing but love of him .
as to consent to live with him on any other terms than marriage ? ''
`` it does seem .
and it is most shocking indeed .
'' replied elizabeth .
with tears in her eyes .
`` that a sister 's sense of decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt .
but , really , i know not what to say .
perhaps i am not doing her justice .
but she is very young .
she has never been taught to think on serious subjects .
and for the last half year .
nay , for a twelvemonth , she has been given up to nothing but amusement and vanity .
she has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle and frivolous manner .
and to adopt any opinions that came in her way .
since the .
.
shire were first quartered in meryton .
nothing but love , flirtation , and officers , have been in her head .
she has been doing every thing in her power by thinking and talking on the subject , to give greater .
what shall i call it ?
susceptibility to her feelings .
which are naturally lively enough .
and we all know that wickham has every charm of person and address that can captivate a woman . ''
`` but you see that jane .
'' said her aunt .
`` does not think so ill of wickham , as to believe him capable of the attempt . ''
`` of whom does jane ever think ill ?
and who is there .
whatever might be their former conduct .
that she would believe capable of such an attempt , till it were proved against them ?
but jane knows , as well as i do , what wickham really is .
we both know that he has been profligate in every sense of the word .
that he has neither integrity nor honour .
that he is as false and deceitful , as he is insinuating . ''
`` and do you really know all this ? ''
cried mrs. gardiner , whose curiosity as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive .
`` i do , indeed , '' replied elizabeth , colouring .
`` i told you the other day , of his infamous behaviour to mr. darcy .
and you .
yourself .
when last at longbourn .
heard in what manner he spoke of the man , who had behaved with such forbearance and liberality towards him .
and there are other circumstances which i am not at liberty .
which it is not worth while to relate .
but his lies about the whole pemberley family are endless .
from what he said of miss darcy .
i was thoroughly prepared to see a proud , reserved , disagreeable girl .
yet he knew to the contrary himself .
he must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found her . ''
`` but does lydia know nothing of this ?
can she be ignorant of what you and jane seem so well to understand ? ''
`` oh , yes ! .
that , that is the worst of all .
till i was in kent .
and saw so much both of mr. darcy and his relation .
colonel fitzwilliam , i was ignorant of the truth myself .
and when i returned home , the .
.
shire was to leave meryton in a week or fortnight 's time .
as that was the case .
neither jane .
to whom i related the whole , nor i , thought it necessary to make our knowledge public .
for of what use could it apparently be to any one .
that the good opinion which all the neighbourhood had of him , should then be overthrown ?
and even when it was settled that lydia should go with mrs. forster .
the necessity of opening her eyes to his character never occurred to me .
that she could be in any danger from the deception never entered my head .
that such a consequence as this should ensue , you may easily believe was far enough from my thoughts . ''
`` when they all removed to brighton .
therefore , you had no reason , i suppose , to believe them fond of each other . ''
`` not the slightest .
i can remember no symptom of affection on either side .
and had any thing of the kind been perceptible .
you must be aware that ours is not a family , on which it could be thrown away .
when first he entered the corps , she was ready enough to admire him .
but so we all were .
every girl in , or near meryton , was out of her senses about him for the first two months .
but he never distinguished her by any particular attention .
and , consequently .
after a moderate period of extravagant and wild admiration .
her fancy for him gave way .
and others of the regiment , who treated her with more distinction , again became her favourites . ''
* * * * * it may be easily believed .
that however little of novelty could be added to their fears .
hopes .
and conjectures .
on this interesting subject .
by its repeated discussion , no other could detain them from it long , during the whole of the journey .
from elizabeth 's thoughts it was never absent .
fixed there by the keenest of all anguish .
self reproach , she could find no interval of ease or forgetfulness .
they travelled as expeditiously as possible .
and sleeping one night on the road , reached longbourn by dinner-time the next day .
it was a comfort to elizabeth to consider that jane could not have been wearied by long expectations .
the little gardiners .
attracted by the sight of a chaise .
were standing on the steps of the house , as they entered the paddock .
and when the carriage drove up to the door .
the joyful surprise that lighted up their faces .
and displayed itself over their whole bodies .
in a variety of capers and frisks , was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome .
elizabeth jumped out .
and .
after giving each of them an hasty kiss .
hurried into the vestibule .
where jane , who came running down stairs from her mother 's apartment , immediately met her .
elizabeth .
as she affectionately embraced her .
whilst tears filled the eyes of both .
lost not a moment in asking whether any thing had been heard of the fugitives .
`` not yet , '' replied jane .
`` but now that my dear uncle is come , i hope every thing will be well . ''
`` is my father in town ? ''
`` yes , he went on tuesday as i wrote you word . ''
`` and have you heard from him often ? ''
`` we have heard only once .
he wrote me a few lines on wednesday .
to say that he had arrived in safety .
and to give me his directions , which i particularly begged him to do .
he merely added , that he should not write again , till he had something of importance to mention . ''
`` and my mother .
how is she ?
how are you all ? ''
`` my mother is tolerably well , i trust .
though her spirits are greatly shaken .
she is up stairs , and will have great satisfaction in seeing you all .
she does not yet leave her dressing-room .
mary and kitty , thank heaven !
are quite well . ''
`` but you .
how are you ? ''
cried elizabeth .
`` you look pale .
how much you must have gone through ! ''
her sister , however , assured her , of her being perfectly well .
and their conversation .
which had been passing while mr. and mrs. gardiner were engaged with their children .
was now put an end to , by the approach of the whole party .
jane ran to her uncle and aunt , and welcomed and thanked them both , with alternate smiles and tears .
when they were all in the drawing-room .
the questions which elizabeth had already asked .
were of course repeated by the others , and they soon found that jane had no intelligence to give .
the sanguine hope of good .
however , which the benevolence of her heart suggested , had not yet deserted her .
she still expected that it would all end well .
and that every morning would bring some letter .
either from lydia or her father , to explain their proceedings , and perhaps announce the marriage .
mrs. bennet .
to whose apartment they all repaired .
after a few minutes conversation together , received them exactly as might be expected .
with tears and lamentations of regret .
invectives against the villanous conduct of wickham , and complaints of her own sufferings and ill usage .
blaming every body but the person to whose ill judging indulgence the errors of her daughter must be principally owing .
`` if i had been able .
'' said she .
`` to carry my point of going to brighton , with all my family , this would not have happened .
but poor dear lydia had nobody to take care of her .
why did the forsters ever let her go out of their sight ?
i am sure there was some great neglect or other on their side .
for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing .
if she had been well looked after .
i always thought they were very unfit to have the charge of her .
but i was over-ruled , as i always am .
poor dear child !
and now here 's mr. bennet gone away .
and i know he will fight wickham .
wherever he meets him , and then he will be killed , and what is to become of us all ?
the collinses will turn us out , before he is cold in his grave .
and if you are not kind to us , brother , i do not know what we shall do . ''
they all exclaimed against such terrific ideas .
and mr. gardiner .
after general assurances of his affection for her and all her family .
told her that he meant to be in london the very next day .
and would assist mr. bennet in every endeavour for recovering lydia .
`` do not give way to useless alarm .
'' added he .
`` though it is right to be prepared for the worst .
there is no occasion to look on it as certain .
it is not quite a week since they left brighton .
in a few days more .
we may gain some news of them .
and till we know that they are not married .
and have no design of marrying , do not let us give the matter over as lost .
as soon as i get to town .
i shall go to my brother .
and make him come home with me to gracechurch street .
and then we may consult together as to what is to be done . ''
`` oh !
my dear brother , '' replied mrs. bennet , `` that is exactly what i could most wish for .
and now do , when you get to town , find them out , wherever they may be .
and if they are not married already , make them marry .
and as for wedding clothes .
do not let them wait for that .
but tell lydia she shall have as much money as she chuses .
to buy them , after they are married .
and , above all things , keep mr. bennet from fighting .
tell him what a dreadful state i am in , .
that i am frightened out of my wits .
and have such tremblings .
such flutterings .
all over me .
such spasms in my side .
and pains in my head .
and such beatings at heart , that i can get no rest by night nor by day .
and tell my dear lydia .
not to give any directions about her clothes .
till she has seen me , for she does not know which are the best warehouses .
oh , brother , how kind you are !
i know you will contrive it all . ''
but mr. gardiner .
though he assured her again of his earnest endeavours in the cause .
could not avoid recommending moderation to her , as well in her hopes as her fears .
and .
after talking with her in this manner till dinner was on table .
they left her to vent all her feelings on the housekeeper .
who attended , in the absence of her daughters .
though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real occasion for such a seclusion from the family .
they did not attempt to oppose it .
for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her tongue before the servants .
while they waited at table .
and judged it better that one only of the household .
and the one whom they could most trust , should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the subject .
in the dining-room they were soon joined by mary and kitty .
who had been too busily engaged in their separate apartments , to make their appearance before .
one came from her books , and the other from her toilette .
the faces of both , however , were tolerably calm .
and no change was visible in either .
except that the loss of her favourite sister .
or the anger which she had herself incurred in the business .
had given something more of fretfulness than usual , to the accents of kitty .
as for mary .
she was mistress enough of herself to whisper to elizabeth with a countenance of grave reflection .
soon after they were seated at table , `` this is a most unfortunate affair .
and will probably be much talked of .
but we must stem the tide of malice .
and pour into the wounded bosoms of each other , the balm of sisterly consolation . ''
then .
perceiving in elizabeth no inclination of replying .
she added .
'' unhappy as the event must be for lydia , we may draw from it this useful lesson .
that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable .
that one false step involves her in endless ruin .
that her reputation is no less brittle than it is beautiful , .
and that she can not be too much guarded in her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex . ''
elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement , but was too much oppressed to make any reply .
mary , however , continued to console herself with such kind of moral extractions from the evil before them .
in the afternoon , the two elder miss bennets were able to be for half an hour by themselves .
and elizabeth instantly availed herself of the opportunity of making many enquiries , which jane was equally eager to satisfy .
after joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel of this event .
which elizabeth considered as all but certain , and miss bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible .
the former continued the subject .
by saying , `` but tell me all and every thing about it , which i have not already heard .
give me farther particulars .
what did colonel forster say ?
had they no apprehension of any thing before the elopement took place ?
they must have seen them together for ever . ''
`` colonel forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality .
especially on lydia 's side , but nothing to give him any alarm .
i am so grieved for him .
his behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost .
he was coming to us .
in order to assure us of his concern .
before he had any idea of their not being gone to scotland : when that apprehension first got abroad .
it hastened his journey . ''
`` and was denny convinced that wickham would not marry ?
did he know of their intending to go off ?
had colonel forster seen denny himself ? ''
`` yes .
but when questioned by him denny denied knowing any thing of their plan .
and would not give his real opinion about it .
he did not repeat his persuasion of their not marrying .
and from that , i am inclined to hope , he might have been misunderstood before . ''
`` and till colonel forster came himself .
not one of you entertained a doubt , i suppose , of their being really married ? ''
`` how was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains !
i felt a little uneasy .
a little fearful of my sister 's happiness with him in marriage .
because i knew that his conduct had not been always quite right .
my father and mother knew nothing of that , they only felt how imprudent a match it must be .
kitty then owned .
with a very natural triumph on knowing more than the rest of us .
that in lydia 's last letter , she had prepared her for such a step .
she had known , it seems , of their being in love with each other , many weeks . ''
`` but not before they went to brighton ? ''
`` no , i believe not . ''
`` and did colonel forster appear to think ill of wickham himself ?
does he know his real character ? ''
`` i must confess that he did not speak so well of wickham as he formerly did .
he believed him to be imprudent and extravagant .
and since this sad affair has taken place , it is said , that he left meryton greatly in debt .
but i hope this may be false . ''
`` oh .
jane .
had we been less secret .
had we told what we knew of him , this could not have happened ! ''
`` perhaps it would have been better . ''
replied her sister .
`` but to expose the former faults of any person .
without knowing what their present feelings were , seemed unjustifiable .
we acted with the best intentions . ''
`` could colonel forster repeat the particulars of lydia 's note to his wife ? ''
`` he brought it with him for us to see . ''
jane then took it from her pocket-book , and gave it to elizabeth .
these were the contents : `` my dear harriet .
`` you will laugh when you know where i am gone .
and i can not help laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning , as soon as i am missed .
i am going to gretna green .
and if you can not guess with who .
i shall think you a simpleton .
for there is but one man in the world i love , and he is an angel .
i should never be happy without him , so think it no harm to be off .
you need not send them word at longbourn of my going .
if you do not like it .
for it will make the surprise the greater .
when i write to them , and sign my name lydia wickham .
what a good joke it will be !
i can hardly write for laughing .
pray make my excuses to pratt , for not keeping my engagement , and dancing with him to-night .
tell him i hope he will excuse me when he knows all .
and tell him i will dance with him at the next ball we meet , with great pleasure .
i shall send for my clothes when i get to longbourn .
but i wish you would tell sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown .
before they are packed up .
good bye .
give my love to colonel forster , i hope you will drink to our good journey .
`` your affectionate friend , `` lydia bennet . ''
`` oh !
thoughtless , thoughtless lydia ! ''
cried elizabeth when she had finished it .
`` what a letter is this , to be written at such a moment .
but at least it shews , that she was serious in the object of her journey .
whatever he might afterwards persuade her to , it was not on her side a scheme of infamy .
my poor father !
how he must have felt it ! ''
`` i never saw any one so shocked .
he could not speak a word for full ten minutes .
my mother was taken ill immediately , and the whole house in such confusion ! ''
`` oh !
jane .
'' cried elizabeth .
`` was there a servant belonging to it .
who did not know the whole story before the end of the day ? ''
`` i do not know.. i hope there was.. but to be guarded at such a time .
is very difficult .
my mother was in hysterics .
and though i endeavoured to give her every assistance in my power .
i am afraid i did not do so much as i might have done !
but the horror of what might possibly happen , almost took from me my faculties . ''
`` your attendance upon her , has been too much for you .
you do not look well .
oh !
that i had been with you , you have had every care and anxiety upon yourself alone . ''
`` mary and kitty have been very kind .
and would have shared in every fatigue .
i am sure , but i did not think it right for either of them .
kitty is slight and delicate .
and mary studies so much , that her hours of repose should not be broken in on .
my aunt philips came to longbourn on tuesday , after my father went away .
and was so good as to stay till thursday with me .
she was of great use and comfort to us all , and lady lucas has been very kind .
she walked here on wednesday morning to condole with us .
and offered her services , or any of her daughters , if they could be of use to us . ''
`` she had better have stayed at home , '' cried elizabeth .
`` perhaps she meant well .
but , under such a misfortune as this , one can not see too little of one 's neighbours .
assistance is impossible .
condolence , insufferable .
let them triumph over us at a distance , and be satisfied . ''
she then proceeded to enquire into the measures which her father had intended to pursue .
while in town , for the recovery of his daughter .
`` he meant .
i believe .
'' replied jane .
`` to go to epsom .
the place where they last changed horses .
see the postilions , and try if any thing could be made out from them .
his principal object must be , to discover the number of the hackney coach which took them from clapham .
it had come with a fare from london .
and as he thought the circumstance of a gentleman and lady 's removing from one carriage into another .
might be remarked , he meant to make enquiries at clapham .
if he could any how discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare .
he determined to make enquiries there .
and hoped it might not be impossible to find out the stand and number of the coach .
i do not know of any other designs that he had formed
: but he was in such a hurry to be gone .
and his spirits so greatly discomposed , that i had difficulty in finding out even so much as this . ''
the whole party were in hopes of a letter from mr. bennet the next morning .
but the post came in without bringing a single line from him .
his family knew him to be on all common occasions .
a most negligent and dilatory correspondent , but at such a time , they had hoped for exertion .
they were forced to conclude .
that he had no pleasing intelligence to send .
but even of that they would have been glad to be certain .
mr. gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off .
when he was gone .
they were certain at least of receiving constant information of what was going on .
and their uncle promised .
at parting .
to prevail on mr. bennet to return to longbourn .
as soon as he could .
to the great consolation of his sister .
who considered it as the only security for her husband 's not being killed in a duel .
mrs. gardiner and the children were to remain in hertfordshire a few days longer .
as the former thought her presence might be serviceable to her nieces .
she shared in their attendance on mrs. bennet .
and was a great comfort to them , in their hours of freedom .
their other aunt also visited them frequently .
and always .
as she said .
with the design of cheering and heartening them up .
though as she never came without reporting some fresh instance of wickham 's extravagance or irregularity .
she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found them .
all meryton seemed striving to blacken the man .
who , but three months before , had been almost an angel of light .
he was declared to be in debt to every tradesman in the place .
and his intrigues , all honoured with the title of seduction , had been extended into every tradesman 's family .
every body declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world .
and every body began to find out , that they had always distrusted the appearance of his goodness .
elizabeth .
though she did not credit above half of what was said .
believed enough to make her former assurance of her sister 's ruin still more certain .
and even jane .
who believed still less of it .
became almost hopeless .
more especially as the time was now come .
when if they had gone to scotland .
which she had never before entirely despaired of , they must in all probability have gained some news of them .
mr. gardiner left longbourn on sunday .
on tuesday , his wife received a letter from him .
it told them .
that on his arrival .
he had immediately found out his brother , and persuaded him to come to gracechurch street .
that mr. bennet had been to epsom and clapham , before his arrival , but without gaining any satisfactory information .
and that he was now determined to enquire at all the principal hotels in town .
as mr. bennet thought it possible they might have gone to one of them .
on their first coming to london , before they procured lodgings .
mr. gardiner himself did not expect any success from this measure .
but as his brother was eager in it , he meant to assist him in pursuing it .
he added .
that mr. bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present , to leave london , and promised to write again very soon .
there was also a postscript to this effect .
`` i have written to colonel forster to desire him to find out .
if possible .
from some of the young man 's intimates in the regiment .
whether wickham has any relations or connections .
who would be likely to know in what part of the town he has now concealed himself .
if there were any one .
that one could apply to .
with a probability of gaining such a clue as that , it might be of essential consequence .
at present we have nothing to guide us .
colonel forster will , i dare say , do every thing in his power to satisfy us on this head .
but .
on second thoughts .
perhaps lizzy could tell us , what relations he has now living , better than any other person . ''
elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference for her authority proceeded .
but it was not in her power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature .
as the compliment deserved .
she had never heard of his having had any relations .
except a father and mother , both of whom had been dead many years .
it was possible , however , that some of his companions in the .
.
shire , might be able to give more information .
and .
though she was not very sanguine in expecting it , the application was a something to look forward to .
every day at longbourn was now a day of anxiety .
but the most anxious part of each was when the post was expected .
the arrival of letters was the first grand object of every morning 's impatience .
through letters .
whatever of good or bad was to be told .
would be communicated , and every succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance .
but before they heard again from mr. gardiner .
a letter arrived for their father , from a different quarter , from mr. collins .
which .
as jane had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence , she accordingly read .
and elizabeth , who knew what curiosities his letters always were , looked over her , and read it likewise .
it was as follows : `` my dear sir .
`` i feel myself called upon .
by our relationship .
and my situation in life .
to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now suffering under .
of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from hertfordshire .
be assured .
my dear sir .
that mrs. collins and myself sincerely sympathise with you .
and all your respectable family .
in your present distress .
which must be of the bitterest kind , because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove .
no arguments shall be wanting on my part , that can alleviate so severe a misfortune .
or that may comfort you .
under a circumstance that must be of all others most afflicting to a parent 's mind .
the death of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of this .
and it is the more to be lamented .
because there is reason to suppose .
as my dear charlotte informs me .
that this licentiousness of behaviour in your daughter .
has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence .
though .
at the same time .
for the consolation of yourself and mrs. bennet .
i am inclined to think that her own disposition must be naturally bad .
or she could not be guilty of such an enormity , at so early an age .
howsoever that may be .
you are grievously to be pitied .
in which opinion i am not only joined by mrs. collins .
but likewise by lady catherine and her daughter , to whom i have related the affair .
they agree with me in apprehending that this false step in one daughter .
will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others .
for who , as lady catherine herself condescendingly says , will connect themselves with such a family .
and this consideration leads me moreover to reflect with augmented satisfaction on a certain event of last november .
for had it been otherwise , i must have been involved in all your sorrow and disgrace .
let me advise you then .
my dear sir .
to console yourself as much as possible .
to throw off your unworthy child from your affection for ever .
and leave her to reap the fruits of her own heinous offence .
`` i am .
dear sir .
& c. & c. '' mr. gardiner did not write again .
till he had received an answer from colonel forster .
and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send .
it was not known that wickham had a single relation .
with whom he kept up any connection , and it was certain that he had no near one living .
his former acquaintance had been numerous .
but since he had been in the militia .
it did not appear that he was on terms of particular friendship with any of them .
there was no one therefore who could be pointed out , as likely to give any news of him .
and in the wretched state of his own finances .
there was a very powerful motive for secrecy .
in addition to his fear of discovery by lydia 's relations .
for it had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him , to a very considerable amount .
colonel forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expences at brighton .
he owed a good deal in the town , but his debts of honour were still more formidable .
mr. gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the longbourn family .
jane heard them with horror .
`` a gamester ! ''
she cried .
`` this is wholly unexpected .
i had not an idea of it . ''
mr. gardiner added in his letter .
that they might expect to see their father at home on the following day , which was saturday .
rendered spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours .
he had yielded to his brother-in-law 's intreaty that he would return to his family .
and leave it to him to do , whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable for continuing their pursuit .
when mrs. bennet was told of this .
she did not express so much satisfaction as her children expected .
considering what her anxiety for his life had been before .
`` what , is he coming home , and without poor lydia ! ''
she cried .
`` sure he will not leave london before he has found them .
who is to fight wickham , and make him marry her , if he comes away ? ''
as mrs. gardiner began to wish to be at home .
it was settled that she and her children should go to london .
at the same time that mr. bennet came from it .
the coach .
therefore , took them the first stage of their journey , and brought its master back to longbourn .
mrs. gardiner went away in all the perplexity about elizabeth and her derbyshire friend .
that had attended her from that part of the world .
his name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece .
and the kind of half-expectation which mrs. gardiner had formed .
of their being followed by a letter from him , had ended in nothing .
elizabeth had received none since her return , that could come from pemberley .
the present unhappy state of the family , rendered any other excuse for the lowness of her spirits unnecessary .
nothing , therefore .
could be fairly conjectured from that .
though elizabeth .
who was by this time tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings .
was perfectly aware .
that .
had she known nothing of darcy , she could have borne the dread of lydia 's infamy somewhat better .
it would have spared her , she thought , one sleepless night out of two .
when mr. bennet arrived , he had all the appearance of his usual philosophic composure .
he said as little as he had ever been in the habit of saying .
made no mention of the business that had taken him away .
and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of it .
it was not till the afternoon .
when he joined them at tea , that elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject .
and then .
on her briefly expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured .
he replied , `` say nothing of that .
who should suffer but myself ?
it has been my own doing , and i ought to feel it . ''
`` you must not be too severe upon yourself , '' replied elizabeth .
`` you may well warn me against such an evil .
human nature is so prone to fall into it !
no , lizzy , let me once in my life feel how much i have been to blame .
i am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression .
it will pass away soon enough . ''
`` do you suppose them to be in london ? ''
`` yes .
where else can they be so well concealed ? ''
`` and lydia used to want to go to london , '' added kitty .
`` she is happy , then , '' said her father , drily .
`` and her residence there will probably be of some duration . ''
then .
after a short silence .
he continued .
`` lizzy .
i bear you no ill-will for being justified in your advice to me last may .
which , considering the event , shews some greatness of mind . ''
they were interrupted by miss bennet , who came to fetch her mother's tea .
`` this is a parade , '' cried he , `` which does one good .
it gives such an elegance to misfortune !
another day i will do the same .
i will sit in my library .
in my night cap and powdering gown , and give as much trouble as i can , .
or , perhaps , i may defer it , till kitty runs away . ''
`` i am not going to run away , papa , '' said kitty , fretfully .
`` if i should ever go to brighton , i would behave better than lydia . ''
`` you go to brighton ! .
i would not trust you so near it as east bourne for fifty pounds !
no .
kitty , i have at last learnt to be cautious , and you will feel the effects of it .
no officer is ever to enter my house again , nor even to pass through the village .
balls will be absolutely prohibited , unless you stand up with one of your sisters .
and you are never to stir out of doors .
till you can prove , that you have spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner . ''
kitty , who took all these threats in a serious light , began to cry .
`` well , well , '' said he , `` do not make yourself unhappy .
if you are a good girl for the next ten years .
i will take you to a review at the end of them . ''
two days after mr. bennet 's return .
as jane and elizabeth were walking together in the shrubbery behind the house .
they saw the housekeeper coming towards them .
and , concluding that she came to call them to their mother , went forward to meet her .
but .
instead of the expected summons .
when they approached her .
she said to miss bennet .
`` i beg your pardon .
madam .
for interrupting you .
but i was in hopes you might have got some good news from town .
so i took the liberty of coming to ask . ''
`` what do you mean , hill ?
we have heard nothing from town . ''
`` dear madam .
'' cried mrs. hill .
in great astonishment , `` do n't you know there is an express come for master from mr. gardiner ?
he has been here this half hour , and master has had a letter . ''
away ran the girls , too eager to get in to have time for speech .
they ran through the vestibule into the breakfast room .
from thence to the library.. their father was in neither .
and they were on the point of seeking him up stairs with their mother .
when they were met by the butler .
who said .
`` if you are looking for my master , ma'am , he is walking towards the little copse . ''
upon this information .
they instantly passed through the hall once more .
and ran across the lawn after their father .
who was deliberately pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock .
jane , who was not so light .
nor so much in the habit of running as elizabeth .
soon lagged behind .
while her sister .
panting for breath .
came up with him , and eagerly cried out , `` oh , papa , what news ?
what news ?
have you heard from my uncle ? ''
`` yes , i have had a letter from him by express . ''
`` well , and what news does it bring ?
good or bad ? ''
`` what is there of good to be expected ? ''
said he , taking the letter from his pocket .
`` but perhaps you would like to read it . ''
elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand .
jane now came up .
`` read it aloud .
'' said their father , `` for i hardly know myself what it is about . ''
`` gracechurch-street , monday , august 2 .
`` my dear brother .
`` at last i am able to send you some tidings of my niece .
and such as , upon the whole , i hope will give you satisfaction .
soon after you left me on saturday .
i was fortunate enough to find out in what part of london they were .
the particulars , i reserve till we meet .
it is enough to know they are discovered , i have seen them both .
. ``
`` then it is , as i always hoped , '' cried jane .
`` they are married ! ''
elizabeth read on .
`` i have seen them both .
they are not married , nor can i find there was any intention of being so .
but if you are willing to perform the engagements which i have ventured to make on your side .
i hope it will not be long before they are .
all that is required of you is .
to assure to your daughter .
by settlement .
her equal share of the five thousand pounds .
secured among your children after the decease of yourself and my sister .
and .
moreover , to enter into an engagement of allowing her , during your life , one hundred pounds per annum .
these are conditions .
which .
considering every thing .
i had no hesitation in complying with , as far as i thought myself privileged , for you .
i shall send this by express , that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer .
you will easily comprehend .
from these particulars , that mr. wickham's circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to be .
the world has been deceived in that respect .
and i am happy to say .
there will be some little money .
even when all his debts are discharged , to settle on my niece , in addition to her own fortune .
if .
as i conclude will be the case .
you send me full powers to act in your name .
throughout the whole of this business , i will immediately give directions to haggerston for preparing a proper settlement .
there will not be the smallest occasion for your coming to town again .
therefore , stay quietly at longbourn , and depend on my diligence and care .
send back your answer as soon as you can , and be careful to write explicitly .
we have judged it best .
that my niece should be married from this house , of which i hope you will approve .
she comes to us to-day .
i shall write again as soon as any thing more is determined on .
your 's , & c. `` edw .
gardiner . ''
`` is it possible ! ''
cried elizabeth , when she had finished .
`` can it be possible that he will marry her ? ''
`` wickham is not so undeserving , then , as we have thought him . ''
said her sister .
`` my dear father , i congratulate you . ''
`` and have you answered the letter ? ''
said elizabeth .
`` no .
but it must be done soon . ''
most earnestly did she then intreat him to lose no more time before he wrote .
`` oh !
my dear father , '' she cried , `` come back , and write immediately .
consider how important every moment is , in such a case . ''
`` let me write for you , '' said jane , `` if you dislike the trouble yourself . ''
`` i dislike it very much , '' he replied .
`` but it must be done . ''
and so saying , he turned back with them , and walked towards the house .
`` and may i ask ? ''
said elizabeth , `` but the terms , i suppose , must be complied with . ''
`` complied with !
i am only ashamed of his asking so little . ''
`` and they must marry !
yet he is such a man ! ''
`` yes , yes , they must marry .
there is nothing else to be done .
but there are two things that i want very much to know : .
one is , how much money your uncle has laid down , to bring it about .
and the other , how i am ever to pay him . ''
`` money !
my uncle ! ''
cried jane , `` what do you mean , sir ? ''
`` i mean .
that no man in his senses .
would marry lydia on so slight a temptation as one hundred a-year during my life .
and fifty after i am gone . ''
`` that is very true , '' said elizabeth .
`` though it had not occurred to me before .
his debts to be discharged , and something still to remain !
oh !
it must be my uncle 's doings !
generous , good man , i am afraid he has distressed himself .
a small sum could not do all this . ''
`` no .
'' said her father .
`` wickham 's a fool , if he takes her with a farthing less than ten thousand pounds .
i should be sorry to think so ill of him , in the very beginning of our relationship . ''
`` ten thousand pounds !
heaven forbid !
how is half such a sum to be repaid ? ''
mr. bennet made no answer .
and each of them , deep in thought , continued silent till they reached the house .
their father then went to the library to write , and the girls walked into the breakfast-room .
`` and they are really to be married ! ''
cried elizabeth , as soon as they were by themselves .
`` how strange this is !
and for this we are to be thankful .
that they should marry .
small as is their chance of happiness , and wretched as is his character , we are forced to rejoice !
oh , lydia ! ''
`` i comfort myself with thinking .
'' replied jane .
`` that he certainly would not marry lydia , if he had not a real regard for her .
though our kind uncle has done something towards clearing him .
i can not believe that ten thousand pounds , or any thing like it , has been advanced .
he has children of his own , and may have more .
how could he spare half ten thousand pounds ? ''
`` if we are ever able to learn what wickham 's debts have been .
'' said elizabeth .
`` and how much is settled on his side on our sister .
we shall exactly know what mr. gardiner has done for them , because wickham has not sixpence of his own .
the kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be requited .
their taking her home .
and affording her their personal protection and countenance .
is such a sacrifice to her advantage , as years of gratitude can not enough acknowledge .
by this time she is actually with them !
if such goodness does not make her miserable now , she will never deserve to be happy !
what a meeting for her , when she first sees my aunt ! ''
`` we must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side .
'' said jane : `` i hope and trust they will yet be happy .
his consenting to marry her is a proof .
i will believe , that he is come to a right way of thinking .
their mutual affection will steady them .
and i flatter myself they will settle so quietly .
and live in so rational a manner , as may in time make their past imprudence forgotten . ''
`` their conduct has been such .
'' replied elizabeth , `` as neither you , nor i , nor any body , can ever forget .
it is useless to talk of it . ''
it now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had happened .
they went to the library .
therefore , and asked their father , whether he would not wish them to make it known to her .
he was writing , and , without raising his head , coolly replied , `` just as you please . ''
`` may we take my uncle 's letter to read to her ? ''
`` take whatever you like , and get away . ''
elizabeth took the letter from his writing table , and they went up stairs together .
mary and kitty were both with mrs. bennet : one communication would , therefore , do for all .
after a slight preparation for good news , the letter was read aloud .
mrs. bennet could hardly contain herself .
as soon as jane had read mr. gardiner 's hope of lydia's being soon married .
her joy burst forth , and every following sentence added to its exuberance .
she was now in an irritation as violent from delight .
as she had ever been fidgetty from alarm and vexation .
to know that her daughter would be married was enough .
she was disturbed by no fear for her felicity , nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct .
`` my dear , dear lydia ! ''
she cried : `` this is delightful indeed ! .
she will be married ! .
i shall see her again ! .
she will be married at sixteen ! .
my good , kind brother ! .
i knew how it would be .
i knew he would manage every thing .
how i long to see her !
and to see dear wickham too !
but the clothes , the wedding clothes !
i will write to my sister gardiner about them directly .
lizzy , my dear , run down to your father , and ask him how much he will give her .
stay , stay , i will go myself .
ring the bell , kitty , for hill .
i will put on my things in a moment .
my dear , dear lydia ! .
how merry we shall be together when we meet ! ''
her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of these transports .
by leading her thoughts to the obligations which mr. gardiner 's behaviour laid them all under .
`` for we must attribute this happy conclusion .
'' she added , `` in a great measure , to his kindness .
we are persuaded that he has pledged himself to assist mr. wickham with money . ''
`` well , '' cried her mother , `` it is all very right .
who should do it but her own uncle ?
if he had not had a family of his own .
i and my children must have had all his money you know .
and it is the first time we have ever had any thing from him , except a few presents .
well !
i am so happy .
in a short time , i shall have a daughter married .
mrs. wickham !
how well it sounds .
and she was only sixteen last june .
my dear jane , i am in such a flutter , that i am sure i ca n't write .
so i will dictate , and you write for me .
we will settle with your father about the money afterwards .
but the things should be ordered immediately . ''
she was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico .
muslin , and cambric .
and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders .
had not jane .
though with some difficulty , persuaded her to wait , till her father was at leisure to be consulted .
one day 's delay she observed , would be of small importance .
and her mother was too happy , to be quite so obstinate as usual .
other schemes too came into her head .
`` i will go to meryton .
'' said she .
`` as soon as i am dressed , and tell the good , good news to my sister philips .
and as i come back , i can call on lady lucas and mrs. long .
kitty , run down and order the carriage .
an airing would do me a great deal of good , i am sure .
girls , can i do any thing for you in meryton ?
oh !
here comes hill .
my dear hill , have you heard the good news ?
miss lydia is going to be married .
and you shall all have a bowl of punch , to make merry at her wedding . ''
mrs. hill began instantly to express her joy .
elizabeth received her congratulations amongst the rest .
and then .
sick of this folly , took refuge in her own room , that she might think with freedom .
poor lydia 's situation must , at best , be bad enough .
but that it was no worse , she had need to be thankful .
she felt it so .
and though .
in looking forward , neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity , could be justly expected for her sister .
in looking back to what they had feared .
only two hours ago , she felt all the advantages of what they had gained .
mr. bennet had very often wished .
before this period of his life .
that .
instead of spending his whole income .
he had laid by an annual sum .
for the better provision of his children , and of his wife , if she survived him .
he now wished it more than ever .
had he done his duty in that respect .
lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle .
for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchased for her .
the satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in great britain to be her husband .
might then have rested in its proper place .
he was seriously concerned .
that a cause of so little advantage to any one .
should be forwarded at the sole expence of his brother-in-law .
and he was determined .
if possible .
to find out the extent of his assistance , and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could .
when first mr. bennet had married , economy was held to be perfectly useless .
for , of course , they were to have a son .
this son was to join in cutting off the entail .
as soon as he should be of age .
and the widow and younger children would by that means be provided for .
five daughters successively entered the world , but yet the son was to come .
and mrs. bennet , for many years after lydia 's birth , had been certain that he would .
this event had at last been despaired of , but it was then too late to be saving .
mrs. bennet had no turn for economy .
and her husband 's love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their income .
five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on mrs. bennet and the children .
but in what proportions it should be divided amongst the latter , depended on the will of the parents .
this was one point .
with regard to lydia at least .
which was now to be settled .
and mr. bennet could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him .
in terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother .
though expressed most concisely .
he then delivered on paper his perfect approbation of all that was done .
and his willingness to fulfil the engagements that had been made for him .
he had never before supposed that .
could wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter .
it would be done with so little inconvenience to himself , as by the present arrangement .
he would scarcely be ten pounds a-year the loser , by the hundred that was to be paid them .
for .
what with her board and pocket allowance .
and the continual presents in money .
which passed to her .
through her mother 's hands , lydia 's expences had been very little within that sum .
that it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side , too , was another very welcome surprise .
for his chief wish at present , was to have as little trouble in the business as possible .
when the first transports of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over .
he naturally returned to all his former indolence .
his letter was soon dispatched .
for though dilatory in undertaking business , he was quick in its execution .
he begged to know farther particulars of what he was indebted to his brother .
but was too angry with lydia , to send any message to her .
the good news quickly spread through the house .
and with proportionate speed through the neighbourhood .
it was borne in the latter with decent philosophy .
to be sure it would have been more for the advantage of conversation .
had miss lydia bennet come upon the town .
or , as the happiest alternative , been secluded from the world , in some distant farm house .
but there was much to be talked of , in marrying her .
and the good-natured wishes for her well-doing .
which had proceeded before .
from all the spiteful old ladies in meryton .
lost but little of their spirit in this change of circumstances .
because with such an husband , her misery was considered certain .
it was a fortnight since mrs. bennet had been down stairs .
but on this happy day .
she again took her seat at the head of her table , and in spirits oppressively high .
no sentiment of shame gave a damp to her triumph .
the marriage of a daughter .
which had been the first object of her wishes .
since jane was sixteen .
was now on the point of accomplishment .
and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those attendants of elegant nuptials .
fine muslins , new carriages , and servants .
she was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a proper situation for her daughter .
and , without knowing or considering what their income might be , rejected many as deficient in size and importance .
`` haye-park might do .
'' said she .
`` if the gouldings would quit it , or the great house at stoke , if the drawing-room were larger .
but ashworth is too far off !
i could not bear to have her ten miles from me .
and as for purvis lodge , the attics are dreadful . ''
her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption , while the servants remained .
but when they had withdrawn .
he said to her .
`` mrs. bennet .
before you take any .
or all of these houses , for your son and daughter , let us come to a right understanding .
into one house in this neighbourhood , they shall never have admittance .
i will not encourage the impudence of either , by receiving them at longbourn . ''
a long dispute followed this declaration .
but mr. bennet was firm : it soon led to another .
and mrs. bennet found .
with amazement and horror , that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for his daughter .
he protested that she should receive from him no mark of affection whatever , on the occasion .
mrs. bennet could hardly comprehend it .
that his anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable resentment .
as to refuse his daughter a privilege .
without which her marriage would scarcely seem valid , exceeded all that she could believe possible .
she was more alive to the disgrace .
which the want of new clothes must reflect on her daughter 's nuptials .
than to any sense of shame at her eloping and living with wickham , a fortnight before they took place .
elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had .
from the distress of the moment , been led to make mr. darcy acquainted with their fears for her sister .
for since her marriage would so shortly give the proper termination to the elopement .
they might hope to conceal its unfavourable beginning , from all those who were not immediately on the spot .
she had no fear of its spreading farther , through his means .
there were few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depended .
but at the same time .
there was no one , whose knowledge of a sister's frailty would have mortified her so much .
not , however , from any fear of disadvantage from it , individually to herself .
for at any rate , there seemed a gulf impassable between them .
had lydia 's marriage been concluded on the most honourable terms .
it was not to be supposed that mr. darcy would connect himself with a family .
where to every other objection would now be added .
an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with the man whom he so justly scorned .
from such a connection she could not wonder that he should shrink .
the wish of procuring her regard .
which she had assured herself of his feeling in derbyshire .
could not in rational expectation survive such a blow as this .
she was humbled , she was grieved .
she repented , though she hardly knew of what .
she became jealous of his esteem , when she could no longer hope to be benefited by it .
she wanted to hear of him , when there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence .
she was convinced that she could have been happy with him .
when it was no longer likely they should meet .
what a triumph for him .
as she often thought .
could he know that the proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago .
would now have been gladly and gratefully received !
he was as generous , she doubted not , as the most generous of his sex .
but while he was mortal , there must be a triumph .
she began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man .
who , in disposition and talents , would most suit her .
his understanding and temper , though unlike her own , would have answered all her wishes .
it was an union that must have been to the advantage of both .
by her ease and liveliness .
his mind might have been softened .
his manners improved .
and from his judgment .
information , and knowledge of the world , she must have received benefit of greater importance .
but no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what connubial felicity really was .
an union of a different tendency .
and precluding the possibility of the other , was soon to be formed in their family .
how wickham and lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence , she could not imagine .
but how little of permanent happiness could belong to a couple who
were only brought together because their passions were stronger than their virtue .
she could easily conjecture .
* * * * * mr. gardiner soon wrote again to his brother .
to mr. bennet's acknowledgments he briefly replied .
with assurances of his eagerness to promote the welfare of any of his family .
and concluded with intreaties that the subject might never be mentioned to him again .
the principal purport of his letter was to inform them , that mr. wickham had resolved on quitting the militia .
`` it was greatly my wish that he should do so .
'' he added , `` as soon as his marriage was fixed on .
and i think you will agree with me .
in considering a removal from that corps as highly advisable , both on his account and my niece 's .
it is mr. wickham 's intention to go into the regulars .
and .
among his former friends , there are still some who are able and willing to assist him in the army .
he has the promise of an ensigncy in general .
.
's regiment , now quartered in the north .
it is an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom .
he promises fairly .
and i hope among different people .
where they may each have a character to preserve , they will both be more prudent .
i have written to colonel forster .
to inform him of our present arrangements .
and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of mr. wickham in and near brighton .
with assurances of speedy payment , for which i have pledged myself .
and will you give yourself the trouble of carrying similar assurances to his creditors in meryton .
of whom i shall subjoin a list , according to his information .
he has given in all his debts .
i hope at least he has not deceived us .
haggerston has our directions , and all will be completed in a week .
they will then join his regiment , unless they are first invited to longbourn .
and i understand from mrs. gardiner .
that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all , before she leaves the south .
she is well .
and begs to be dutifully remembered to you and her mother.. your 's , & c. `` e .
gardiner . ''
mr. bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of wickham 's removal from the .
.
shire , as clearly as mr. gardiner could do .
but mrs. bennet , was not so well pleased with it .
lydia 's being settled in the north .
just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her company .
for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in hertfordshire , was a severe disappointment .
and besides .
it was such a pity that lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted with every body .
and had so many favourites .
`` she is so fond of mrs. forster .
'' said she , `` it will be quite shocking to send her away !
and there are several of the young men , too , that she likes very much .
the officers may not be so pleasant in general .
.
's regiment . ''
his daughter 's request .
for such it might be considered .
of being admitted into her family again .
before she set off for the north , received at first an absolute negative .
but jane and elizabeth .
who agreed in wishing .
for the sake of their sister 's feelings and consequence .
that she should be noticed on her marriage by her parents .
urged him so earnestly .
yet so rationally and so mildly .
to receive her and her husband at longbourn .
as soon as they were married .
that he was prevailed on to think as they thought , and act as they wished .
and their mother had the satisfaction of knowing .
that she should be able to shew her married daughter in the neighbourhood .
before she was banished to the north .
when mr. bennet wrote again to his brother , therefore , he sent his permission for them to come .
and it was settled , that as soon as the ceremony was over , they should proceed to longbourn .
elizabeth was surprised .
however .
that wickham should consent to such a scheme .
and .
had she consulted only her own inclination .
any meeting with him would have been the last object of her wishes .
their sister 's wedding day arrived .
and jane and elizabeth felt for her probably more than she felt for herself .
the carriage was sent to meet them at .
.
, and they were to return in it , by dinner-time .
their arrival was dreaded by the elder miss bennets .
and jane more especially .
who gave lydia the feelings which would have attended herself .
had she been the culprit , was wretched in the thought of what her sister must endure .
they came .
the family were assembled in the breakfast room , to receive them .
smiles decked the face of mrs. bennet , as the carriage drove up to the door .
her husband looked impenetrably grave .
her daughters , alarmed , anxious , uneasy .
lydia 's voice was heard in the vestibule .
the door was thrown open , and she ran into the room .
her mother stepped forwards , embraced her , and welcomed her with rapture .
gave her hand with an affectionate smile to wickham .
who followed his lady .
and wished them both joy , with an alacrity which shewed no doubt of their happiness .
their reception from mr. bennet , to whom they then turned , was not quite so cordial .
his countenance rather gained in austerity .
and he scarcely opened his lips .
the easy assurance of the young couple , indeed , was enough to provoke him .
elizabeth was disgusted , and even miss bennet was shocked .
lydia was lydia still .
untamed , unabashed , wild , noisy , and fearless .
she turned from sister to sister .
demanding their congratulations .
and when at length they all sat down .
looked eagerly round the room .
took notice of some little alteration in it .
and observed , with a laugh , that it was a great while since she had been there .
wickham was not at all more distressed than herself .
but his manners were always so pleasing .
that had his character and his marriage been exactly what they ought .
his smiles and his easy address , while he claimed their relationship , would have delighted them all .
elizabeth had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance .
but she sat down .
resolving within herself , to draw no limits in future to the impudence of an impudent man .
she blushed , and jane blushed .
but the cheeks of the two who caused their confusion , suffered no variation of colour .
there was no want of discourse .
the bride and her mother could neither of them talk fast enough .
and wickham .
who happened to sit near elizabeth .
began enquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood .
with a good humoured ease , which she felt very unable to equal in her replies .
they seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the world .
nothing of the past was recollected with pain .
and lydia led voluntarily to subjects , which her sisters would not have alluded to for the world .
`` only think of its being three months , '' she cried , `` since i went away .
it seems but a fortnight i declare .
and yet there have been things enough happened in the time .
good gracious !
when i went away .
i am sure i had no more idea of being married till i came back again !
though i thought it would be very good fun if i was . ''
her father lifted up his eyes .
jane was distressed .
elizabeth looked expressively at lydia .
but she .
who never heard nor saw any thing of which she chose to be insensible , gaily continued , `` oh !
mamma , do the people here abouts know i am married to-day ?
i was afraid they might not .
and we overtook william goulding in his curricle .
so i was determined he should know it .
and so i let down the side glass next to him .
and took off my glove .
and let my hand just rest upon the window frame .
so that he might see the ring , and then i bowed and smiled like any thing . ''
elizabeth could bear it no longer .
she got up , and ran out of the room .
and returned no more , till she heard them passing through the hall to the dining-parlour .
she then joined them soon enough to see lydia .
with anxious parade .
walk up to her mother 's right hand , and hear her say to her eldest sister , `` ah !
jane .
i take your place now , and you must go lower , because i am a married woman . ''
it was not to be supposed that time would give lydia that embarrassment .
from which she had been so wholly free at first .
her ease and good spirits increased .
she longed to see mrs. philips .
the lucases .
and all their other neighbours , and to hear herself called `` mrs. wickham , '' by each of them .
and in the mean time .
she went after dinner to shew her ring and boast of being married .
to mrs. hill and the two housemaids .
`` well .
mamma .
'' said she .
when they were all returned to the breakfast room , `` and what do you think of my husband ?
is not he a charming man ?
i am sure my sisters must all envy me .
i only hope they may have half my good luck .
they must all go to brighton .
that is the place to get husbands .
what a pity it is , mamma , we did not all go . ''
`` very true .
and if i had my will , we should .
but my dear lydia , i don't at all like your going such a way off .
must it be so ? ''
`` oh , lord !
yes.. there is nothing in that .
i shall like it of all things .
you and papa , and my sisters , must come down and see us .
we shall be at newcastle all the winter .
and i dare say there will be some balls .
and i will take care to get good partners for them all . ''
`` i should like it beyond any thing ! ''
said her mother .
`` and then when you go away , you may leave one or two of my sisters behind you .
and i dare say i shall get husbands for them before the winter is over . ''
`` i thank you for my share of the favour , '' said elizabeth .
`` but i do not particularly like your way of getting husbands . ''
their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them .
mr. wickham had received his commission before he left london .
and he was to join his regiment at the end of a fortnight .
no one but mrs. bennet , regretted that their stay would be so short .
and she made the most of the time .
by visiting about with her daughter , and having very frequent parties at home .
these parties were acceptable to all .
to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did think , than such as did not .
wickham 's affection for lydia , was just what elizabeth had expected to find it .
not equal to lydia 's for him .
she had scarcely needed her present observation to be satisfied .
from the reason of things .
that their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love , rather than by his .
and she would have wondered why .
without violently caring for her .
he chose to elope with her at all .
had she not felt certain that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances .
and if that were the case .
he was not the young man to resist an opportunity of having a companion .
lydia was exceedingly fond of him .
he was her dear wickham on every occasion .
no one was to be put in competition with him .
he did every thing best in the world .
and she was sure he would kill more birds on the first of september .
than any body else in the country .
one morning .
soon after their arrival .
as she was sitting with her two elder sisters .
she said to elizabeth , `` lizzy , i never gave you an account of my wedding , i believe .
you were not by , when i told mamma , and the others , all about it .
are not you curious to hear how it was managed ? ''
`` no really , '' replied elizabeth .
`` i think there can not be too little said on the subject . ''
`` la !
you are so strange !
but i must tell you how it went off .
we were married , you know , at st. clement 's , because wickham 's lodgings were in that parish .
and it was settled that we should all be there by eleven o'clock .
my uncle and aunt and i were to go together .
and the others were to meet us at the church .
well , monday morning came , and i was in such a fuss !
i was so afraid you know that something would happen to put it off .
and then i should have gone quite distracted .
and there was my aunt .
all the time i was dressing , preaching and talking away just as if she was reading a sermon .
however .
i did not hear above one word in ten .
for i was thinking , you may suppose , of my dear wickham .
i longed to know whether he would be married in his blue coat .
`` well , and so we breakfasted at ten as usual .
i thought it would never be over .
for .
by the bye .
you are to understand , that my uncle and aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time i was with them .
if you 'll believe me .
i did not once put my foot out of doors , though i was there a fortnight .
not one party , or scheme , or any thing .
to be sure london was rather thin , but however the little theatre was open .
well .
and so just as the carriage came to the door .
my uncle was called away upon business to that horrid man mr. stone .
and then , you know , when once they get together , there is no end of it .
well .
i was so frightened i did not know what to do , for my uncle was to give me away .
and if we were beyond the hour , we could not be married all day .
but , luckily , he came back again in ten minutes time , and then we all set out .
however .
i recollected afterwards .
that if he had been prevented going .
the wedding need not be put off , for mr. darcy might have done as well . ''
`` mr .
darcy ! ''
repeated elizabeth , in utter amazement .
`` oh , yes ! .
he was to come there with wickham , you know .
but gracious me !
i quite forgot !
i ought not to have said a word about it .
i promised them so faithfully !
what will wickham say ?
it was to be such a secret ! ''
`` if it was to be secret , '' said jane , `` say not another word on the subject .
you may depend upon my seeking no further . ''
`` oh !
certainly , '' said elizabeth , though burning with curiosity .
`` we will ask you no questions . ''
`` thank you .
'' said lydia .
`` for if you did , i should certainly tell you all , and then wickham would be angry . ''
on such encouragement to ask , elizabeth was forced to put it out of her power , by running away .
but to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible .
or at least it was impossible not to try for information .
mr. darcy had been at her sister 's wedding .
it was exactly a scene .
and exactly among people , where he had apparently least to do , and least temptation to go .
conjectures as to the meaning of it , rapid and wild , hurried into her brain .
but she was satisfied with none .
those that best pleased her , as placing his conduct in the noblest light , seemed most improbable .
she could not bear such suspense .
and hastily seizing a sheet of paper .
wrote a short letter to her aunt .
to request an explanation of what lydia had dropt .
if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been intended .
`` you may readily comprehend .
'' she added .
`` what my curiosity must be to know how a person unconnected with any of us .
and ( comparatively speaking ) a stranger to our family , should have been amongst you at such a time .
pray write instantly , and let me understand it .
unless it is , for very cogent reasons , to remain in the secrecy which lydia seems to think necessary .
and then i must endeavour to be satisfied with ignorance . ''
`` not that i shall though , '' she added to herself , as she finished the letter .
`` and my dear aunt .
if you do not tell me in an honourable manner .
i shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it out . ''
jane 's delicate sense of honour would not allow her to
speak to elizabeth privately of what lydia had let fall .
elizabeth was glad of it.. till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any satisfaction .
she had rather be without a confidante .
elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter , as soon as she possibly could .
she was no sooner in possession of it .
than hurrying into the little copse .
where she was least likely to be interrupted .
she sat down on one of the benches , and prepared to be happy .
for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not contain a denial .
`` gracechurch-street , sept. 6 .
`` my dear niece .
`` i have just received your letter .
and shall devote this whole morning to answering it .
as i foresee that a little writing will not comprise what i have to tell you .
i must confess myself surprised by your application .
i did not expect it from you .
do n't think me angry .
however .
for i only mean to let you know .
that i had not imagined such enquiries to be necessary on your side .
if you do not choose to understand me , forgive my impertinence .
your uncle is as much surprised as i am .
and nothing but the belief of your being a party concerned .
would have allowed him to act as he has done .
but if you are really innocent and ignorant , i must be more explicit .
on the very day of my coming home from longbourn , your uncle had a most unexpected visitor .
mr. darcy called , and was shut up with him several hours .
it was all over before i arrived .
so my curiosity was not so dreadfully racked as your 's seems to have been .
he came to tell mr. gardiner that he had found out where your sister and mr. wickham were .
and that he had seen and talked with them both , wickham repeatedly , lydia once .
from what i can collect .
he left derbyshire only one day after ourselves , and came to town with the resolution of hunting for them .
the motive professed .
was his conviction of its being owing to himself that wickham 's worthlessness had not been so well known .
as to make it impossible for any young woman of character , to love or confide in him .
he generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride .
and confessed that he had before thought it beneath him , to lay his private actions open to the world .
his character was to speak for itself .
he called it .
therefore .
his duty to step forward , and endeavour to remedy an evil , which had been brought on by himself .
if he had another motive , i am sure it would never disgrace him .
he had been some days in town , before he was able to discover them .
but he had something to direct his search , which was more than we had .
and the consciousness of this , was another reason for his resolving to follow us .
there is a lady .
it seems .
a mrs. younge .
who was some time ago governess to miss darcy .
and was dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation , though he did not say what .
she then took a large house in edward-street , and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings .
this mrs. younge was , he knew , intimately acquainted with wickham .
and he went to her for intelligence of him , as soon as he got to town .
but it was two or three days before he could get from her what he wanted .
she would not betray her trust .
i suppose , without bribery and corruption , for she really did know where her friend was to be found .
wickham indeed had gone to her .
on their first arrival in london .
and had she been able to receive them into her house .
they would have taken up their abode with her .
at length , however , our kind friend procured the wished-for direction .
they were in .
.
street .
he saw wickham , and afterwards insisted on seeing lydia .
his first object with her .
he acknowledged .
had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful situation .
and return to her friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive her .
offering his assistance , as far as it would go .
but he found lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was .
she cared for none of her friends .
she wanted no help of his , she would not hear of leaving wickham .
she was sure they should be married some time or other , and it did not much signify when .
since such were her feelings .
it only remained .
he thought .
to secure and expedite a marriage .
which , in his very first conversation with wickham , he easily learnt , had never been his design .
he confessed himself obliged to leave the regiment .
on account of some debts of honour , which were very pressing .
and scrupled not to lay all the ill-consequences of lydia 's flight , on her own folly alone .
he meant to resign his commission immediately .
and as to his future situation , he could conjecture very little about it .
he must go somewhere .
but he did not know where , and he knew he should have nothing to live on .
mr. darcy asked him why he had not married your sister at once .
though mr. bennet was not imagined to be very rich .
he would have been able to do something for him , and his situation must have been benefited by marriage .
but he found .
in reply to this question .
that wickham still cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune by marriage , in some other country .
under such circumstances , however , he was not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief .
they met several times , for there was much to be discussed .
wickham of course wanted more than he could get .
but at length was reduced to be reasonable .
every thing being settled between them .
mr. darcy 's next step was to make your uncle acquainted with it .
and he first called in gracechurch-street the evening before i came home .
but mr. gardiner could not be seen .
and mr. darcy found .
on further enquiry , that your father was still with him , but would quit town the next morning .
he did not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as your uncle .
and therefore readily postponed seeing him , till after the departure of the former .
he did not leave his name .
and till the next day , it was only known that a gentleman had called on business .
on saturday he came again .
your father was gone .
your uncle at home , and , as i said before , they had a great deal of talk together .
they met again on sunday , and then i saw him too .
it was not all settled before monday : as soon as it was .
the express was sent off to longbourn .
but our visitor was very obstinate .
i fancy , lizzy , that obstinacy is the real defect of his character after all .
he has been accused of many faults at different times .
but this is the true one .
nothing was to be done that he did not do himself .
though i am sure ( and i do not speak it to be thanked .
therefore say nothing about it , ) your uncle would most readily have settled the whole .
they battled it together for a long time .
which was more than either the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved .
but at last your uncle was forced to yield .
and instead of being allowed to be of use to his niece .
was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it , which went sorely against the grain .
and i really believe your letter this morning gave him great pleasure .
because it required an explanation that would rob him of his borrowed feathers .
and give the praise where it was due .
but , lizzy , this must go no farther than yourself , or jane at most .
you know pretty well , i suppose , what has been done for the young people .
his debts are to be paid .
amounting .
i believe .
to considerably more than a thousand pounds .
another thousand in addition to her own settled upon her , and his commission purchased .
the reason why all this was to be done by him alone , was such as i have given above .
it was owing to him .
to his reserve .
and want of proper consideration .
that wickham 's character had been so misunderstood .
and consequently that he had been received and noticed as he was .
perhaps there was some truth in this .
though i doubt whether his reserve , or anybody's reserve , can be answerable for the event .
but in spite of all this fine talking .
my dear lizzy .
you may rest perfectly assured .
that your uncle would never have yielded .
if we had not given him credit for another interest in the affair .
when all this was resolved on , he returned again to his friends , who were still staying at pemberley .
but it was agreed that he should be in london once more when the wedding took place .
and all money matters were then to receive the last finish .
i believe i have now told you every thing .
it is a relation which you tell me is to give you great surprise .
i hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure .
lydia came to us .
and wickham had constant admission to the house .
he was exactly what he had been , when i knew him in hertfordshire .
but i would not tell you how little i was satisfied with her behaviour while she staid with us .
if i had not perceived .
by jane 's letter last wednesday .
that her conduct on coming home was exactly of a piece with it .
and therefore what i now tell you , can give you no fresh pain .
i talked to her repeatedly in the most serious manner .
representing to her all the wickedness of what she had done .
and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family .
if she heard me , it was by good luck , for i am sure she did not listen .
i was sometimes quite provoked .
but then i recollected my dear elizabeth and jane , and for their sakes had patience with her .
mr. darcy was punctual in his return , and as lydia informed you , attended the wedding .
he dined with us the next day , and was to leave town again on wednesday or thursday .
will you be very angry with me .
my dear lizzy .
if i take this opportunity of saying ( what i was never
bold enough to say before ) how much i like him .
his behaviour to us has , in every respect , been as pleasing as when we were in derbyshire .
his understanding and opinions all please me .
he wants nothing but a little more liveliness .
and that , if he marry prudently , his wife may teach him .
i thought him very sly.. he hardly ever mentioned your name .
but slyness seems the fashion .
pray forgive me .
if i have been very presuming .
or at least do not punish me so far .
as to exclude me from p. i shall never be quite happy till i have been all round the park .
a low phaeton , with a nice little pair of ponies , would be the very thing .
but i must write no more .
the children have been wanting me this half hour .
your 's , very sincerely , `` m .
gardiner . ''
the contents of this letter threw elizabeth into a flutter of spirits .
in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the greatest share .
the vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had produced of what
mr. darcy might have been doing to forward her sister's match .
which she had feared to encourage .
as an exertion of goodness too great to be probable .
and at the same time dreaded to be just .
from the pain of obligation , were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true !
he had followed them purposely to town .
he had taken on himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research .
in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and despise .
and where he was reduced to meet .
frequently meet .
reason with .
persuade .
and finally bribe .
the man whom he always most wished to avoid .
and whose very name it was punishment to him to pronounce .
he had done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem .
her heart did whisper , that he had done it for her .
but it was a hope shortly checked by other considerations .
and she soon felt that even her vanity was insufficient .
when required to depend on his affection for her .
for a woman who had already refused him .
as able to overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with wickham .
brother-in-law of wickham !
every kind of pride must revolt from the connection .
he had to be sure done much .
she was ashamed to think how much .
but he had given a reason for his interference , which asked no extraordinary stretch of belief .
it was reasonable that he should feel he had been wrong .
he had liberality , and he had the means of exercising it .
and though she would not place herself as his principal inducement .
she could .
perhaps .
believe .
that remaining partiality for her .
might assist his endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be materially concerned .
it was painful .
exceedingly painful , to know that they were under obligations to a person who could never receive a return .
they owed the restoration of lydia , her character , every thing to him .
oh !
how heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever encouraged .
every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him .
for herself she was humbled .
but she was proud of him .
proud that in a cause of compassion and honour , he had been able to get the better of himself .
she read over her aunt 's commendation of him again and again .
it was hardly enough .
but it pleased her .
she was even sensible of some pleasure .
though mixed with regret .
on finding how steadfastly both she and her uncle had been
persuaded that affection and confidence subsisted between mr. darcy and herself .
she was roused from her seat , and her reflections , by some one's approach .
and before she could strike into another path , she was overtaken by wickham .
`` i am afraid i interrupt your solitary ramble , my dear sister ? ''
said he , as he joined her .
`` you certainly do , '' she replied with a smile .
`` but it does not follow that the interruption must be unwelcome . ''
`` i should be sorry indeed , if it were .
we were always good friends .
and now we are better . ''
`` true .
are the others coming out ? ''
`` i do not know .
mrs. bennet and lydia are going in the carriage to meryton .
and so .
my dear sister , i find from our uncle and aunt , that you have actually seen pemberley . ''
she replied in the affirmative .
`` i almost envy you the pleasure .
and yet i believe it would be too much for me .
or else i could take it in my way to newcastle .
and you saw the old housekeeper , i suppose ?
poor reynolds , she was always very fond of me .
but of course she did not mention my name to you . ''
`` yes , she did . ''
`` and what did she say ? ''
`` that you were gone into the army , and she was afraid had .
not turned out well .
at such a distance as that , you know , things are strangely misrepresented . ''
`` certainly , '' he replied , biting his lips .
elizabeth hoped she had silenced him .
but he soon afterwards said , `` i was surprised to see darcy in town last month .
we passed each other several times .
i wonder what he can be doing there . ''
`` perhaps preparing for his marriage with miss de bourgh , '' said elizabeth .
`` it must be something particular , to take him there at this time of year . ''
`` undoubtedly .
did you see him while you were at lambton ?
i thought i understood from the gardiners that you had . ''
`` yes .
he introduced us to his sister . ''
`` and do you like her ? ''
`` very much . ''
`` i have heard , indeed , that she is uncommonly improved within this year or two .
when i last saw her , she was not very promising .
i am very glad you liked her .
i hope she will turn out well . ''
`` i dare say she will .
she has got over the most trying age . ''
`` did you go by the village of kympton ? ''
`` i do not recollect that we did . ''
`` i mention it , because it is the living which i ought to have had .
a most delightful place ! .
excellent parsonage house !
it would have suited me in every respect . ''
`` how should you have liked making sermons ? ''
`` exceedingly well .
i should have considered it as part of my duty , and the exertion would soon have been nothing .
one ought not to repine.. but , to be sure , it would have been such a thing for me !
the quiet , the retirement of such a life , would have answered all my ideas of happiness !
but it was not to be .
did you ever hear darcy mention the circumstance , when you were in kent ? ''
`` i have heard from authority .
which i thought as good .
that it was left you conditionally only , and at the will of the present patron . ''
`` you have .
yes , there was something in that .
i told you so from the first , you may remember . ''
`` i did hear .
too .
that there was a time .
when sermon-making was not so palatable to you as it seems to be at present .
that you actually declared your resolution of never taking orders , and that the business had been compromised accordingly . ''
`` you did !
and it was not wholly without foundation .
you may remember what i told you on that point , when first we talked of it . ''
they were now almost at the door of the house .
for she had walked fast to get rid of him .
and unwilling for her sister 's sake .
to provoke him .
she only said in reply .
with a good-humoured smile , `` come , mr. wickham , we are brother and sister , you know .
do not let us quarrel about the past .
in future , i hope we shall be always of one mind . ''
she held out her hand .
he kissed it with affectionate gallantry , though he hardly knew how to look , and they entered the house .
mr. wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation .
that he never again distressed himself , or provoked his dear sister elizabeth , by introducing the subject of it .
and she was pleased to find that she had said enough to keep him quiet .
the day of his and lydia 's departure soon came .
and mrs. bennet was forced to submit to a separation .
which .
as her husband by no means entered into her scheme of their all going to newcastle .
was likely to continue at least a twelvemonth .
`` oh !
my dear lydia , '' she cried , `` when shall we meet again ? ''
`` oh , lord !
i do n't know .
not these two or three years perhaps . ''
`` write to me very often , my dear . ''
`` as often as i can .
but you know married women have never much time for writing .
my sisters may write to me .
they will have nothing else to do . ''
mr. wickham 's adieus were much more affectionate than his wife 's .
he smiled , looked handsome , and said many pretty things .
`` he is as fine a fellow .
'' said mr. bennet , as soon as they were out of the house , `` as ever i saw .
he simpers , and smirks , and makes love to us all .
i am prodigiously proud of him .
i defy even sir william lucas himself , to produce a more valuable son-in-law . ''
the loss of her daughter made mrs. bennet very dull for several days .
`` i often think .
'' said she , `` that there is nothing so bad as parting with one 's friends .
one seems so forlorn without them . ''
`` this is the consequence you see , madam , of marrying a daughter , '' said elizabeth .
`` it must make you better satisfied that your other four are single . ''
`` it is no such thing .
lydia does not leave me because she is married .
but only because her husband 's regiment happens to be so far off .
if that had been nearer , she would not have gone so soon . ''
but the spiritless condition which this event threw her into .
was shortly relieved .
and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope .
by an article of news , which then began to be in circulation .
the housekeeper at netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her master .
who was coming down in a day or two , to shoot there for several weeks .
mrs. bennet was quite in the fidgets .
she looked at jane , and smiled , and shook her head by turns .
`` well .
well .
and so mr. bingley is coming down .
sister , '' ( for mrs. philips first brought her the news . )
`` well , so much the better .
not that i care about it , though .
he is nothing to us , you know , and i am sure i never want to see him again .
but , however , he is very welcome to come to netherfield , if he likes it .
and who knows what may happen ?
but that is nothing to us .
you know , sister , we agreed long ago never to mention a word about it .
and so , is it quite certain he is coming ? ''
`` you may depend on it .
'' replied the other , `` for mrs. nicholls was in meryton last night .
i saw her passing by , and went out myself on purpose to know the truth of it .
and she told me that it was certain true .
he comes down on thursday at the latest , very likely on wednesday .
she was going to the butcher 's .
she told me .
on purpose to order in some meat on wednesday .
and she has got three couple of ducks , just fit to be killed . ''
miss bennet had not been able to hear of his coming , without changing colour .
it was many months since she had mentioned his name to elizabeth .
but now .
as soon as they were alone together .
she said .
`` i saw you look at me to-day , lizzy , when my aunt told us of the present report .
and i know i appeared distressed .
but do n't imagine it was from any silly cause .
i was only confused for the moment , because i felt that i should be looked at .
i do assure you , that the news does not affect me either with pleasure or pain .
i am glad of one thing , that he comes alone .
because we shall see the less of him .
not that i am afraid of myself , but i dread other people 's remarks . ''
elizabeth did not know what to make of it .
had she not seen him in derbyshire .
she might have supposed him capable of coming there , with no other view than what was acknowledged .
but she still thought him partial to jane .
and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming there with his friend 's permission .
or being bold enough to come without it .
`` yet it is hard .
'' she sometimes thought .
`` that this poor man can not come to a house .
which he has legally hired , without raising all this speculation !
i will leave him to himself . ''
in spite of what her sister declared .
and really believed to be her feelings .
in the expectation of his arrival , elizabeth could easily perceive that her spirits were affected by it .
they were more disturbed , more unequal , than she had often seen them .
the subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents .
about a twelvemonth ago , was now brought forward again .
`` as soon as ever mr. bingley comes .
my dear , '' said mrs. bennet , `` you will wait on him of course . ''
`` no , no .
you forced me into visiting him last year .
and promised if i went to see him , he should marry one of my daughters .
but it ended in nothing , and i will not be sent on a fool 's errand again . ''
his wife represented to him how absolutely necessary such an attention would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen .
on his returning to netherfield .
`` 't is an etiquette i despise , '' said he .
`` if he wants our society , let him seek it .
he knows where we live .
i will not spend my hours in running after my neighbours every time they go away .
and come back again . ''
`` well .
all i know is , that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait on him .
but , however , that sha n't prevent my asking him to dine here , i am determined .
we must have mrs. long and the gouldings soon .
that will make thirteen with ourselves , so there will be just room at table for him . ''
consoled by this resolution , she was the better able to bear her husband 's incivility .
though it was very mortifying to know that her neighbours might all see mr. bingley in consequence of it .
before they did .
as the day of his arrival drew near .
`` i begin to be sorry that he comes at all , '' said jane to her sister .
`` it would be nothing .
i could see him with perfect indifference , but i can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of .
my mother means well .
but she does not know , no one can know how much i suffer from what she says .
happy shall i be , when his stay at netherfield is over ! ''
`` i wish i could say any thing to comfort you , '' replied elizabeth .
`` but it is wholly out of my power .
you must feel it .
and the usual satisfaction of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me .
because you have always so much . ''
mr. bingley arrived .
mrs. bennet .
through the assistance of servants .
contrived to have the earliest tidings of it .
that the period of anxiety and fretfulness on her side , might be as long as it could .
she counted the days that must intervene before their invitation could be sent .
hopeless of seeing him before .
but on the third morning after his arrival in hertfordshire .
she saw him from her dressing-room window , enter the paddock , and ride towards the house .
her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy .
jane resolutely kept her place at the table .
but elizabeth , to satisfy her mother , went to the window .
she looked , .
she saw mr. darcy with him , and sat down again by her sister .
`` there is a gentleman with him , mamma , '' said kitty .
`` who can it be ? ''
`` some acquaintance or other , my dear , i suppose .
i am sure i do not know . ''
`` la ! ''
replied kitty , `` it looks just like that man that used to be with him before .
mr. what 's his name .
that tall , proud man . ''
`` good gracious !
mr. darcy ! .
and so it does i vow .
well , any friend of mr. bingley 's will always be welcome here to be sure .
but else i must say that i hate the very sight of him . ''
jane looked at elizabeth with surprise and concern .
she knew but little of their meeting in derbyshire .
and therefore felt for the awkwardness which must attend her sister .
in seeing him almost for the first time after receiving his explanatory letter .
both sisters were uncomfortable enough .
each felt for the other , and of course for themselves .
and their mother talked on .
of her dislike of mr. darcy .
and her resolution to be civil to him only as mr. bingley 's friend .
without being heard by either of them .
but elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be suspected by jane .
to whom she had never yet had courage to shew mrs. gardiner 's letter .
or to relate her own change of sentiment towards him .
to jane .
he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused , and whose merit she had undervalued .
but to her own more extensive information .
he was the person .
to whom the whole family were indebted for the first of benefits .
and whom she regarded herself with an interest .
if not quite so tender , at least as reasonable and just , as what jane felt for bingley .
her astonishment at his coming .
at his coming to netherfield .
to longbourn .
and voluntarily seeking her again .
was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered behaviour in derbyshire .
the colour which had been driven from her face .
returned for half a minute with an additional glow .
and a smile of delight added lustre to her eyes .
as she thought for that space of time , that his affection and wishes must still be unshaken .
but she would not be secure .
`` let me first see how he behaves , '' said she .
`` it will then be early enough for expectation . ''
she sat intently at work .
striving to be composed .
and without daring to lift up her eyes .
till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of her sister , as the servant was approaching the door .
jane looked a little paler than usual , but more sedate than elizabeth had expected .
on the gentlemen 's appearing , her colour increased .
yet she received them with tolerable ease .
and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment , or any unnecessary complaisance .
elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow .
and sat down again to her work , with an eagerness which it did not often command .
she had ventured only one glance at darcy .
he looked serious as usual .
and she thought .
more as he had been used to look in hertfordshire , than as she had seen him at pemberley .
but , perhaps he could not in her mother's presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt .
it was a painful , but not an improbable , conjecture .
bingley .
she had likewise seen for an instant , and in that short period saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed .
he was received by mrs. bennet with a degree of civility .
which made her two daughters ashamed .
especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of her curtsey and address to his friend .
elizabeth particularly .
who knew that her mother owed to the latter the preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy .
was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill applied .
darcy .
after enquiring of her how mr. and mrs. gardiner did .
a question which she could not answer without confusion , said scarcely any thing .
he was not seated by her .
perhaps that was the reason of his silence .
but it had not been so in derbyshire .
there he had talked to her friends , when he could not to herself .
but now several minutes elapsed , without bringing the sound of his voice .
and when occasionally .
unable to resist the impulse of curiosity .
she raised her eyes to his face .
she as often found him looking at jane .
as at herself , and frequently on no object but the ground .
more thoughtfulness , and less anxiety to please than when they last met , were plainly expressed .
she was disappointed , and angry with herself for being so .
`` could i expect it to be otherwise ! ''
said she .
`` yet why did he come ? ''
she was in no humour for conversation with any one but himself .
and to him she had hardly courage to speak .
she enquired after his sister , but could do no more .
`` it is a long time , mr. bingley , since you went away , '' said mrs. bennet .
he readily agreed to it .
`` i began to be afraid you would never come back again .
people did say , you meant to quit the place entirely at michaelmas .
but , however , i hope it is not true .
a great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood , since you went away .
miss lucas is married and settled .
and one of my own daughters .
i suppose you have heard of it .
indeed , you must have seen it in the papers .
it was in the times and the courier , i know .
though it was not put in as it ought to be .
it was only said , 'lately , george wickham , esq .
to miss lydia bennet .
' without there being a syllable said of her father .
or the place where she lived , or any thing .
it was my brother gardiner 's drawing up too .
and i wonder how he came to make such an awkward business of it .
did you see it ? ''
bingley replied that he did , and made his congratulations .
elizabeth dared not lift up her eyes .
how mr. darcy looked , therefore , she could not tell .
`` it is a delightful thing .
to be sure .
to have a daughter well married .
'' continued her mother .
`` but at the same time .
mr. bingley , it is very hard to have her taken such a way from me .
they are gone down to newcastle .
a place quite northward .
it seems , and there they are to stay , i do not know how long .
his regiment is there .
for i suppose you have heard of his leaving the .
.
shire , and of his being gone into the regulars .
thank heaven !
he has some friends , though perhaps not so many as he deserves . ''
elizabeth .
who knew this to be levelled at mr. darcy .
was in such misery of shame , that she could hardly keep her seat .
it drew from her , however , the exertion of speaking , which nothing else had so effectually done before .
and she asked bingley , whether he meant to make any stay in the country at present .
a few weeks , he believed .
`` when you have killed all your own birds .
mr. bingley .
'' said her mother .
'' i beg you will come here .
and shoot as many as you please , on mr. bennet 's manor .
i am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you .
and will save all the best of the covies for you . ''
elizabeth 's misery increased , at such unnecessary , such officious attention !
were the same fair prospect to arise at present .
as had flattered them a year ago .
every thing , she was persuaded , would be hastening to the same vexatious conclusion .
at that instant she felt .
that years of happiness could not make jane or herself amends , for moments of such painful confusion .
`` the first wish of my heart .
'' said she to herself , `` is never more to be in company with either of them .
their society can afford no pleasure , that will atone for such wretchedness as this !
let me never see either one or the other again ! ''
yet the misery .
for which years of happiness were to offer no compensation .
received soon afterwards material relief .
from observing how much the beauty of her sister re-kindled the admiration of her former lover .
when first he came in , he had spoken to her but little .
but every five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention .
he found her as handsome as she had been last year .
as good natured , and as unaffected , though not quite so chatty .
jane was anxious that no difference should be perceived in her at all .
and was really persuaded that she talked as much as ever .
but her mind was so busily engaged , that she did not always know when she was silent .
when the gentlemen rose to go away .
mrs. bennet was mindful of her intended civility .
and they were invited and engaged to dine at longbourn in a few days time .
`` you are quite a visit in my debt .
mr. bingley .
'' she added .
`` for when you went to town last winter .
you promised to take a family dinner with us , as soon as you returned .
i have not forgot , you see .
and i assure you .
i was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep your engagement . ''
bingley looked a little silly at this reflection .
and said something of his concern , at having been prevented by business .
they then went away .
mrs. bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine there , that day .
but .
though she always kept a very good table .
she did not think any thing less than two courses .
could be good enough for a man .
on whom she had such anxious designs .
or satisfy the appetite and pride of one who had ten thousand a-year .
as soon as they were gone , elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits .
or in other words , to dwell without interruption on those subjects that must deaden them more .
mr. darcy 's behaviour astonished and vexed her .
`` why .
if he came only to be silent .
grave , and indifferent , '' said she , '' did he come at all ? ''
she could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure .
`` he could be still amiable .
still pleasing , to my uncle and aunt , when he was in town .
and why not to me ?
if he fears me , why come hither ?
if he no longer cares for me , why silent ?
teazing , teazing , man !
i will think no more about him . ''
her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach of her sister .
who joined her with a cheerful look , which shewed her better satisfied with their visitors , than elizabeth .
`` now , '' said she , `` that this first meeting is over , i feel perfectly easy .
i know my own strength , and i shall never be embarrassed again by his coming .
i am glad he dines here on tuesday .
it will then be publicly seen .
that on both sides , we meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance . ''
`` yes , very indifferent indeed , '' said elizabeth , laughingly .
`` oh , jane , take care . ''
`` my dear lizzy , you can not think me so weak , as to be in danger now . ''
`` i think you are in very great danger of making
him as much in love with you as ever . ''
* * * * * they did not see the gentlemen again till tuesday .
and mrs. bennet .
in the meanwhile .
was giving way to all the happy schemes .
which the good humour , and common politeness of bingley , in half an hour 's visit , had revived .
on tuesday there was a large party assembled at longbourn .
and the two .
who were most anxiously expected , to the credit of their punctuality as sportsmen , were in very good time .
when they repaired to the dining-room .
elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether bingley would take the place .
which , in all their former parties , had belonged to him , by her sister .
her prudent mother , occupied by the same ideas , forbore to invite him to sit by herself .
on entering the room , he seemed to hesitate .
but jane happened to look round , and happened to smile : it was decided .
he placed himself by her .
elizabeth , with a triumphant sensation , looked towards his friend .
he bore it with noble indifference .
and she would have imagined that bingley had received his sanction to be happy .
had she not seen his eyes likewise turned towards mr. darcy , with an expression of half-laughing alarm .
his behaviour to her sister was such .
during dinner time .
as shewed an admiration of her .
which .
though more guarded than formerly .
persuaded elizabeth .
that if left wholly to himself , jane 's happiness , and his own , would be speedily secured .
though she dared not depend upon the consequence , she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour .
it gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast .
for she was in no cheerful humour .
mr. darcy was almost as far from her , as the table could divide them .
he was on one side of her mother .
she knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either , or make either appear to advantage .
she was not near enough to hear any of their discourse .
but she could see how seldom they spoke to each other .
and how formal and cold was their manner , whenever they did .
her mother 's ungraciousness , made the sense of what they owed him more painful to elizabeth 's mind .
and she would .
at times .
have given any thing to be privileged to tell him .
that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family .
she was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of bringing them together .
that the whole of the visit would not pass away without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation .
than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance .
anxious and uneasy .
the period which passed in the drawing-room .
before the gentlemen came , was wearisome and dull to a degree , that almost made her uncivil .
she looked forward to their entrance .
as the point on which all her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend .
`` if he does not come to me .
then , '' said she , `` i shall give him up for ever . ''
the gentlemen came .
and she thought he looked as if he would have answered her hopes .
but , alas !
the ladies had crowded round the table .
where miss bennet was making tea .
and elizabeth pouring out the coffee .
in so close a confederacy .
that there was not a single vacancy near her , which would admit of a chair .
and on the gentlemen 's approaching .
one of the girls moved closer to her than ever .
and said , in a whisper , `` the men sha n't come and part us , i am determined .
we want none of them .
do we ? ''
darcy had walked away to another part of the room .
she followed him with her eyes .
envied every one to whom he spoke , had scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee .
and then was enraged against herself for being so silly !
`` a man who has once been refused !
how could i ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of his love ?
is there one among the sex .
who would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman ?
there is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings ! ''
she was a little revived , however , by his bringing back his coffee cup himself .
and she seized the opportunity of saying , `` is your sister at pemberley still ? ''
`` yes , she will remain there till christmas . ''
`` and quite alone ?
have all her friends left her ? ''
`` mrs. annesley is with her .
the others have been gone on to scarborough , these three weeks . ''
she could think of nothing more to say .
but if he wished to converse with her , he might have better success .
he stood by her , however , for some minutes , in silence .
and , at last , on the young lady 's whispering to elizabeth again , he walked away .
when the tea-things were removed .
and the card tables placed .
the ladies all rose .
and elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him .
when all her views were overthrown .
by seeing him fall a victim to her mother 's rapacity for whist players .
and in a few moments after seated with the rest of the party .
she now lost every expectation of pleasure .
they were confined for the evening at different tables .
and she had nothing to hope .
but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side of the room .
as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself .
mrs. bennet had designed to keep the two netherfield gentlemen to supper .
but their carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the others , and she had no opportunity of detaining them .
`` well girls .
'' said she , as soon as they were left to themselves , `` what say you to the day ?
i think every thing has passed off uncommonly well , i assure you .
the dinner was as well dressed as any i ever saw .
the venison was roasted to a turn .
and everybody said , they never saw so fat a haunch .
the soup was fifty times better than what we had at the lucas 's last week .
and even mr. darcy acknowledged , that the partridges were remarkably well done .
and i suppose he has two or three french cooks at least .
and , my dear jane , i never saw you look in greater beauty .
mrs. long said so too , for i asked her whether you did not .
and what do you think she said besides ?
'ah !
mrs. bennet , we shall have her at netherfield at last . '
she did indeed .
i do think mrs. long is as good a creature as ever lived .
and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls , and not at all handsome : i like them prodigiously . ''
mrs. bennet , in short , was in very great spirits .
she had seen enough of bingley 's behaviour to jane .
to be convinced that she would get him at last .
and her expectations of advantage to her family .
when in a happy humour .
were so far beyond reason .
that she was quite disappointed at not seeing him there again the next day , to make his proposals .
`` it has been a very agreeable day , '' said miss bennet to elizabeth .
`` the party seemed so well selected , so suitable one with the other .
i hope we may often meet again . ''
elizabeth smiled .
`` lizzy , you must not do so .
you must not suspect me .
it mortifies me .
i assure you that i have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an agreeable and sensible young man .
without having a wish beyond it .
i am perfectly satisfied from what his manners now are .
that he never had any design of engaging my affection .
it is only that he is blessed with greater sweetness of address .
and a stronger desire of generally pleasing than any other man . ''
`` you are very cruel .
'' said her sister .
`` you will not let me smile , and are provoking me to it every moment . ''
`` how hard it is in some cases to be believed ! ''
`` and how impossible in others ! ''
`` but why should you wish to persuade me that i feel more than i acknowledge ? ''
`` that is a question which i hardly know how to answer .
we all love to instruct , though we can teach only what is not worth knowing .
forgive me .
and if you persist in indifference , do not make me your confidante . ''
a few days after this visit , mr. bingley called again , and alone .
his friend had left him that morning for london , but was to return home in ten days time .
he sat with them above an hour , and was in remarkably good spirits .
mrs. bennet invited him to dine with them .
but , with many expressions of concern , he confessed himself engaged elsewhere .
`` next time you call , '' said she , `` i hope we shall be more lucky . ''
he should be particularly happy at any time .
& c. & c.. and if she would give him leave .
would take an early opportunity of waiting on them .
`` can you come to-morrow ? ''
yes , he had no engagement at all for to-morrow .
and her invitation was accepted with alacrity .
he came , and in such very good time , that the ladies were none of them dressed .
in ran mrs. bennet to her daughter 's room .
in her dressing gown .
and with her hair half finished , crying out , `` my dear jane , make haste and hurry down .
he is come .
mr. bingley is come.. he is , indeed .
make haste , make haste .
here , sarah , come to miss bennet this moment , and help her on with her gown .
never mind miss lizzy 's hair . ''
`` we will be down as soon as we can , '' said jane .
`` but i dare say kitty is forwarder than either of us .
for she went up stairs half an hour ago . ''
`` oh !
hang kitty !
what has she to do with it ?
come be quick , be quick !
where is your sash my dear ? ''
but when her mother was gone .
jane would not be prevailed on to go down without one of her sisters .
the same anxiety to get them by themselves , was visible again in the evening .
after tea .
mr. bennet retired to the library , as was his custom , and mary went up stairs to her instrument .
two obstacles of the five being thus removed .
mrs. bennet sat looking and winking at elizabeth and catherine for a considerable time .
without making any impression on them .
elizabeth would not observe her .
and when at last kitty did , she very innocently said , `` what is the matter mamma ?
what do you keep winking at me for ?
what am i to do ? ''
`` nothing child , nothing .
i did not wink at you . ''
she then sat still five minutes longer .
but unable to waste such a precious occasion .
she suddenly got up .
and saying to kitty .
`` come here .
my love , i want to speak to you , '' took her out of the room .
jane instantly gave a look at elizabeth .
which spoke her distress at such premeditation , and her intreaty that she would not give into it .
in a few minutes .
mrs. bennet half opened the door and called out .
`` lizzy , my dear , i want to speak with you . ''
elizabeth was forced to go .
`` we may as well leave them by themselves you know . ''
said her mother as soon as she was in the hall .
`` kitty and i are going upstairs to sit in my dressing-room . ''
elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother .
but remained quietly in the hall .
till she and kitty were out of sight , then returned into the drawing-room .
mrs. bennet 's schemes for this day were ineffectual .
bingley was every thing that was charming , except the professed lover of her daughter .
his ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their evening party .
and he bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the mother .
and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command of countenance , particularly grateful to the daughter .
he scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper .
and before he went away .
an engagement was formed .
chiefly through his own and mrs. bennet 's means , for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband .
after this day , jane said no more of her indifference .
not a word passed between the sisters concerning bingley .
but elizabeth went to bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded .
unless mr. darcy returned within the stated time .
seriously , however , she felt tolerably persuaded that all this must have taken place with that gentleman's concurrence .
bingley was punctual to his appointment .
and he and mr. bennet spent the morning together , as had been agreed on .
the latter was much more agreeable than his companion expected .
there was nothing of presumption or folly in bingley .
that could provoke his ridicule , or disgust him into silence .
and he was more communicative , and less eccentric than the other had ever seen him .
bingley of course returned with him to dinner .
and in the evening mrs. bennet 's invention was again at
work to get every body away from him and her daughter .
elizabeth , who had a letter to write , went into the breakfast room for that purpose soon after tea .
for as the others were all going to sit down to cards .
she could not be wanted to counteract her mother 's schemes .
but on returning to the drawing-room .
when her letter was finished .
she saw .
to her infinite surprise , there was reason to fear that her mother had been too ingenious for her .
on opening the door .
she perceived her sister and bingley standing together over the hearth , as if engaged in earnest conversation .
and had this led to no suspicion .
the faces of both as they hastily turned round .
and moved away from each other , would have told it all .
their situation was awkward enough .
but her 's she thought was still worse .
not a syllable was uttered by either .
and elizabeth was on the point of going away again .
when bingley .
who as well as the other had sat down .
suddenly rose , and whispering a few words to her sister , ran out of the room .
jane could have no reserves from elizabeth , where confidence would give pleasure .
and instantly embracing her .
acknowledged , with the liveliest emotion , that she was the happiest creature in the world .
`` 't is too much ! ''
she added , `` by far too much .
i do not deserve it .
oh !
why is not every body as happy ? ''
elizabeth 's congratulations were given with a sincerity .
a warmth , a delight , which words could but poorly express .
every sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to jane .
but she would not allow herself to stay with her sister .
or say half that remained to be said , for the present .
`` i must go instantly to my mother . ''
she cried .
`` i would not on any account trifle with her affectionate solicitude .
or allow her to hear it from any one but myself .
he is gone to my father already .
oh !
lizzy , to know that what i have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear family !
how shall i bear so much happiness ! ''
she then hastened away to her mother .
who had purposely broken up the card party , and was sitting up stairs with kitty .
elizabeth .
who was left by herself .
now smiled at the rapidity and ease with which an affair was finally settled .
that had given them so many previous months of suspense and vexation .
`` and this , '' said she , `` is the end of all his friend 's anxious circumspection !
of all his sister 's falsehood and contrivance !
the happiest , wisest , most reasonable end ! ''
in a few minutes she was joined by bingley .
whose conference with her father had been short and to the purpose .
`` where is your sister ? ''
said he hastily , as he opened the door .
`` with my mother up stairs .
she will be down in a moment i dare say . ''
he then shut the door .
and coming up to her , claimed the good wishes and affection of a sister .
elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed her delight in the prospect of their relationship .
they shook hands with great cordiality .
and then till her sister came down .
she had to listen to all he had to say .
of his own happiness , and of jane 's perfections .
and in spite of his being a lover .
elizabeth really believed all his expectations of felicity .
to be rationally founded .
because they had for basis the excellent understanding .
and super-excellent disposition of jane , and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and himself .
it was an evening of no common delight to them all .
the satisfaction of miss bennet 's mind gave a glow of such sweet animation to her face .
as made her look handsomer than ever .
kitty simpered and smiled , and hoped her turn was coming soon .
mrs. bennet could not give her consent .
or speak her approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings .
though she talked to bingley of nothing else , for half an hour .
and when mr. bennet joined them at supper , his voice and manner plainly shewed how really happy he was .
not a word .
however , passed his lips in allusion to it , till their visitor took his leave for the night .
but as soon as he was gone .
he turned to his daughter and said , `` jane , i congratulate you .
you will be a very happy woman . ''
jane went to him instantly , kissed him , and thanked him for his goodness .
`` you are a good girl . ''
he replied , `` and i have great pleasure in thinking you will be so happily settled .
i have not a doubt of your doing very well together .
your tempers are by no means unlike .
you are each of you so complying , that nothing will ever be resolved on .
so easy , that every servant will cheat you .
and so generous , that you will always exceed your income . ''
`` i hope not so .
imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters , would be unpardonable in me . ''
`` exceed their income !
my dear mr. bennet , '' cried his wife , `` what are you talking of ?
why , he has four or five thousand a-year , and very likely more . ''
then addressing her daughter , `` oh !
my dear , dear jane , i am so happy !
i am sure i sha'nt get a wink of sleep all night .
i knew how it would be .
i always said it must be so , at last .
i was sure you could not be so beautiful for nothing !
i remember .
as soon as ever i saw him .
when he first came into hertfordshire last year , i thought how likely it was that you should come together .
oh !
he is the handsomest young man that ever was seen ! ''
wickham , lydia , were all forgotten .
jane was beyond competition her favourite child .
at that moment , she cared for no other .
her younger sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects
of happiness which she might in future be able to dispense .
mary petitioned for the use of the library at netherfield .
and kitty begged very hard for a few balls there every winter .
bingley , from this time , was of course a daily visitor at longbourn .
coming frequently before breakfast , and always remaining till after supper .
unless when some barbarous neighbour .
who could not be enough detested .
had given him an invitation to dinner , which he thought himself obliged to accept .
elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister .
for while he was present , jane had no attention to bestow on any one else .
but she found herself considerably useful to both of them , in those hours of separation that must sometimes occur .
in the absence of jane , he always attached himself to elizabeth , for the pleasure of talking of her .
and when bingley was gone , jane constantly sought the same means of relief .
`` he has made me so happy .
'' said she .
one evening , `` by telling me , that he was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring !
i had not believed it possible . ''
`` i suspected as much , '' replied elizabeth .
`` but how did he account for it ? ''
`` it must have been his sister 's doing .
they were certainly no friends to his acquaintance with me .
which i can not wonder at , since he might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects .
but when they see .
as i trust they will .
that their brother is happy with me .
they will learn to be contented , and we shall be on good terms again .
though we can never be what we once were to each other . ''
`` that is the most unforgiving speech , '' said elizabeth , `` that i ever heard you utter .
good girl !
it would vex me , indeed , to see you again the dupe of miss bingley 's pretended regard . ''
`` would you believe it .
lizzy .
that when he went to town last november .
he really loved me .
and nothing but a persuasion of my being indifferent , would have prevented his coming down again ! ''
`` he made a little mistake to be sure .
but it is to the credit of his modesty . ''
this naturally introduced a panegyric from jane on his diffidence .
and the little value he put on his own good qualities .
elizabeth was pleased to find .
that he had not betrayed the interference of his friend .
for .
though jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world .
she knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice her against him .
`` i am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed ! ''
cried jane .
`` oh !
lizzy , why am i thus singled from my family , and blessed above them all !
if i could but see you as happy !
if there were but such another man for you ! ''
`` if you were to give me forty such men , i never could be so happy as you .
till i have your disposition , your goodness , i never can have your happiness .
no , no , let me shift for myself .
and .
perhaps , if i have very good luck , i may meet with another mr. collins in time . ''
the situation of affairs in the longbourn family could not be long a secret .
mrs. bennet was privileged to whisper it to mrs. philips .
and she ventured , without any permission , to do the same by all her neighbours in meryton .
the bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the world .
though only a few weeks before .
when lydia had first run away , they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune .
one morning .
about a week after bingley 's engagement with jane had been formed .
as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the dining-room .
their attention was suddenly drawn to the window , by the sound of a carriage .
and they perceived a chaise and four driving up the lawn .
it was too early in the morning for visitors .
and besides , the equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours .
the horses were post .
and neither the carriage , nor the livery of the servant who preceded it , were familiar to them .
as it was certain .
however .
that somebody was coming .
bingley instantly prevailed on miss bennet to avoid the confinement of such an intrusion .
and walk away with him into the shrubbery .
they both set off .
and the conjectures of the remaining three continued .
though with little satisfaction , till the door was thrown open , and their visitor entered .
it was lady catherine de bourgh .
they were of course all intending to be surprised .
but their astonishment was beyond their expectation .
and on the part of mrs. bennet and kitty .
though she was perfectly unknown to them , even inferior to what elizabeth felt .
she entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious .
made no other reply to elizabeth 's salutation .
than a slight inclination of the head , and sat down without saying a word .
elizabeth had mentioned her name to her mother .
on her ladyship 's entrance , though no request of introduction had been made .
mrs. bennet all amazement .
though flattered by having a guest of such high importance , received her with the utmost politeness .
after sitting for a moment in silence .
she said very stiffly to elizabeth , `` i hope you are well , miss bennet .
that lady i suppose is your mother . ''
elizabeth replied very concisely that she was .
`` and that i suppose is one of your sisters . ''
`` yes , madam , '' said mrs. bennet , delighted to speak to a lady catherine .
`` she is my youngest girl but one .
my youngest of all .
is lately married .
and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds .
walking with a young man , who i believe will soon become a part of the family . ''
`` you have a very small park here , '' returned lady catherine after a short silence .
`` it is nothing in comparison of rosings , my lady , i dare say .
but i assure you it is much larger than sir william lucas 's . ''
`` this must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening , in summer .
the windows are full west . ''
mrs. bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner .
and then added .
`` may i take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left mr. and mrs. collins well . ''
`` yes , very well .
i saw them the night before last . ''
elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from charlotte .
as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling .
but no letter appeared , and she was completely puzzled .
mrs. bennet , with great civility , begged her ladyship to take some refreshment .
but lady catherine very resolutely , and not very politely , declined eating any thing .
and then rising up .
said to elizabeth .
`` miss bennet .
there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of your lawn .
i should be glad to take a turn in it , if you will favour me with your company . ''
`` go , my dear , '' cried her mother , `` and shew her ladyship about the different walks .
i think she will be pleased with the hermitage . ''
elizabeth obeyed , and running into her own room for her parasol , attended her noble guest down stairs .
as they passed through the hall .
lady catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and drawing-room .
and pronouncing them , after a short survey , to be decent looking rooms , walked on .
her carriage remained at the door , and elizabeth saw that her waiting-woman was in it .
they proceeded in silence along the gravel walk that led to the copse .
elizabeth was determined to make no effort for conversation with a woman .
who was now more than usually insolent and disagreeable .
`` how could i ever think her like her nephew ? ''
said she , as she looked in her face .
as soon as they entered the copse , lady catherine began in the following manner : .
`` you can be at no loss , miss bennet , to understand the reason of my journey hither .
your own heart , your own conscience , must tell you why i come . ''
elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment .
`` indeed , you are mistaken , madam .
i have not been at all able to account for the honour of seeing you here . ''
`` miss bennet .
'' replied her ladyship .
in an angry tone , `` you ought to know , that i am not to be trifled with .
but however insincere you may choose to be , you shall not find me so .
my character has ever been celebrated for its sincerity and frankness .
and in a cause of such moment as this , i shall certainly not depart from it .
a report of a most alarming nature , reached me two days ago .
i was told .
that not only your sister was on the point of being most advantageously married .
but that you .
that miss elizabeth bennet .
would , in all likelihood , be soon afterwards united to my nephew , my own nephew , mr. darcy .
though i know it must be a scandalous falsehood .
though i would not injure him so much as to suppose the truth of it possible .
i instantly resolved on setting off for this place , that i might make my sentiments known to you . ''
`` if you believed it impossible to be true .
'' said elizabeth .
colouring with astonishment and disdain , `` i wonder you took the trouble of coming so far .
what could your ladyship propose by it ? ''
`` at once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted . ''
`` your coming to longbourn .
to see me and my family .
'' said elizabeth , coolly , `` will be rather a confirmation of it .
if , indeed , such a report is in existence . ''
`` if !
do you then pretend to be ignorant of it ?
has it not been industriously circulated by yourselves ?
do you not know that such a report is spread abroad ? ''
`` i never heard that it was . ''
`` and can you likewise declare , that there is no foundation for it ? ''
`` i do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship .
you may ask questions , which i shall not choose to answer . ''
`` this is not to be borne .
miss bennet , i insist on being satisfied .
has he , has my nephew , made you an offer of marriage ? ''
`` your ladyship has declared it to be impossible . ''
`` it ought to be so .
it must be so , while he retains the use of his reason .
but your arts and allurements may .
in a moment of infatuation , have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family .
you may have drawn him in . ''
`` if i have , i shall be the last person to confess it . ''
`` miss bennet , do you know who i am ?
i have not been accustomed to such language as this .
i am almost the nearest relation he has in the world .
and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns . ''
`` but you are not entitled to know mine .
nor will such behaviour as this , ever induce me to be explicit . ''
`` let me be rightly understood .
this match , to which you have the presumption to aspire , can never take place .
no , never .
mr. darcy is engaged to my daughter .
now what have you to say ? ''
`` only this .
that if he is so .
you can have no reason to suppose he will make an offer to me . ''
lady catherine hesitated for a moment .
and then replied , `` the engagement between them is of a peculiar kind .
from their infancy , they have been intended for each other .
it was the favourite wish of his mother , as well as of her 's .
while in their cradles .
we planned the union : and now .
at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would be accomplished .
in their marriage .
to be prevented by a young woman of inferior birth .
of no importance in the world , and wholly unallied to the family !
do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends ?
to his tacit engagement with miss de bourgh ?
are you lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy ?
have you not heard me say , that from his earliest hours he was destined for his cousin ? ''
`` yes , and i had heard it before .
but what is that to me ?
if there is no other objection to my marrying your nephew .
i shall certainly not be kept from it .
by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to marry miss de bourgh .
you both did as much as you could , in planning the marriage .
its completion depended on others .
if mr. darcy is neither by honour nor inclination confined to his cousin .
why is not he to make another choice ?
and if i am that choice , why may not i accept him ? ''
`` because honour , decorum , prudence , nay , interest , forbid it .
yes , miss bennet , interest .
for do not expect to be noticed by his family or friends .
if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all .
you will be censured , slighted , and despised , by every one connected with him .
your alliance will be a disgrace .
your name will never even be mentioned by any of us . ''
`` these are heavy misfortunes , '' replied elizabeth .
`` but the wife of mr. darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily attached to her situation .
that she could , upon the whole , have no cause to repine . ''
`` obstinate , headstrong girl !
i am ashamed of you !
is this your gratitude for my attentions to you last spring ?
is nothing due to me on that score ?
`` let us sit down .
you are to understand , miss bennet , that i came here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose .
nor will i be dissuaded from it .
i have not been used to submit to any person 's whims .
i have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment . ''
`` that will make your ladyship 's situation at present more pitiable .
but it will have no effect on me . ''
`` i will not be interrupted .
hear me in silence .
my daughter and my nephew are formed for each other .
they are descended on the maternal side , from the same noble line .
and , on the father 's , from respectable , honourable , and ancient , though untitled families .
their fortune on both sides is splendid .
they are destined for each other by the voice of every member of their respective houses .
and what is to divide them ?
the upstart pretensions of a young woman without family , connections , or fortune .
is this to be endured !
but it must not , shall not be .
if you were sensible of your own good .
you would not wish to quit the sphere , in which you have been brought up . ''
`` in marrying your nephew , i should not consider myself as quitting that sphere .
he is a gentleman .
i am a gentleman 's daughter .
so far we are equal . ''
`` true .
you are a gentleman 's daughter .
but who was your mother ?
who are your uncles and aunts ?
do not imagine me ignorant of their condition . ''
`` whatever my connections may be .
'' said elizabeth .
`` if your nephew does not object to them , they can be nothing to you . ''
`` tell me once for all , are you engaged to him ? ''
though elizabeth would not , for the mere purpose of obliging lady catherine , have answered this question .
she could not but say , after a moment 's deliberation , `` i am not . ''
lady catherine seemed pleased .
`` and will you promise me , never to enter into such an engagement ? ''
`` i will make no promise of the kind . ''
`` miss bennet i am shocked and astonished .
i expected to find a more reasonable young woman .
but do not deceive yourself into a belief that i will ever recede .
i shall not go away , till you have given me the assurance i require . ''
`` and i certainly never shall give it .
i am not to be intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable .
your ladyship wants mr. darcy to marry your daughter .
but would my giving you the wished-for promise , make their marriage at all more probable ?
supposing him to be attached to me .
would my refusing to accept his hand , make him wish to bestow it on his cousin ?
allow me to say .
lady catherine .
that the arguments with which you have supported this extraordinary application .
have been as frivolous as the application was ill-judged .
you have widely mistaken my character , if you think i can be worked on by such persuasions as these .
how far your nephew might approve of your interference in his affairs , i can not tell .
but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine .
i must beg , therefore , to be importuned no farther on the subject . ''
`` not so hasty , if you please .
i have by no means done .
to all the objections i have already urged , i have still another to add .
i am no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister 's infamous elopement .
i know it all .
that the young man 's marrying her .
was a patched-up business , at the expence of your father and uncles .
and is such a girl to be my nephew 's sister ?
is her husband , is the son of his late father 's steward , to be his brother ?
heaven and earth ! .
of what are you thinking ?
are the shades of pemberley to be thus polluted ? ''
`` you can now have nothing farther to say , '' she resentfully answered .
`` you have insulted me , in every possible method .
i must beg to return to the house . ''
and she rose as she spoke .
lady catherine rose also , and they turned back .
her ladyship was highly incensed .
`` you have no regard , then , for the honour and credit of my nephew !
unfeeling , selfish girl !
do you not consider that a connection with you , must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody ? ''
`` lady catherine , i have nothing farther to say .
you know my sentiments . ''
`` you are then resolved to have him ? ''
`` i have said no such thing .
i am only resolved to act in that manner .
which will .
in my own opinion .
constitute my happiness , without reference to you , or to any person so wholly unconnected with me . ''
`` it is well .
you refuse , then , to oblige me .
you refuse to obey the claims of duty , honour , and gratitude .
you are determined to ruin him in the opinion of all his friends .
and make him the contempt of the world . ''
`` neither duty .
nor honour .
nor gratitude , '' replied elizabeth , `` have any possible claim on me , in the present instance .
no principle of either , would be violated by my marriage with mr. darcy .
and with regard to the resentment of his family .
or the indignation of the world .
if the former were excited by his marrying me , it would not give me one moment's concern .
and the world in general would have too much sense to join in the scorn . ''
`` and this is your real opinion !
this is your final resolve !
very well .
i shall now know how to act .
do not imagine , miss bennet , that your ambition will ever be gratified .
i came to try you .
i hoped to find you reasonable .
but depend upon it i will carry my point . ''
in this manner lady catherine talked on .
till they were at the door of the carriage .
when turning hastily round , she added , `` i take no leave of you , miss bennet .
i send no compliments to your mother .
you deserve no such attention .
i am most seriously displeased . ''
elizabeth made no answer .
and without attempting to persuade her ladyship to return into the house , walked quietly into it herself .
she heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up stairs .
her mother impatiently met her at the door of the dressing-room .
to ask why lady catherine would not come in again and rest herself .
`` she did not choose it , '' said her daughter , `` she would go . ''
`` she is a very fine-looking woman !
and her calling here was prodigiously civil !
for she only came , i suppose , to tell us the collinses were well .
she is on her road somewhere .
i dare say , and so passing through meryton , thought she might as well call on you .
i suppose she had nothing particular to say to you , lizzy ? ''
elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here .
for to acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible .
the discomposure of spirits , which this extraordinary visit threw elizabeth into , could not be easily overcome .
nor could she for many hours , learn to think of it less than incessantly .
lady catherine it appeared .
had actually taken the trouble of this journey from rosings .
for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with mr. darcy .
it was a rational scheme to be sure !
but from what the report of their engagement could originate , elizabeth was at a loss to imagine .
till she recollected that his being the intimate friend of bingley .
and her being the sister of jane .
was enough .
at a time when the expectation of one wedding .
made every body eager for another , to supply the idea .
she had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her sister must bring them more frequently together .
and her neighbours at lucas lodge .
therefore .
( for through their communication with the collinses .
the report she concluded had reached lady catherine ) had only set that down .
as almost certain and immediate , which she had looked forward to as possible , at some future time .
in revolving lady catherine 's expressions .
however , she could not help feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her persisting in this interference .
from what she had said of her resolution to prevent their marriage .
it occurred to elizabeth that she must meditate an application to her nephew .
and how he might take a similar representation of the evils attached to a connection with her .
she dared not pronounce .
she knew not the exact degree of his affection for his aunt .
or his dependence on her judgment .
but it was natural to suppose that he thought much higher of her ladyship than she could do .
and it was certain .
that in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with one .
whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own , his aunt would address him on his weakest side .
with his notions of dignity .
he would probably feel that the arguments .
which to elizabeth had appeared weak and ridiculous , contained much good sense and solid reasoning .
if he had been wavering before .
as to what he should do .
which had often seemed likely .
the advice and intreaty of so near a relation might settle every doubt .
and determine him at once to be as happy , as dignity unblemished could make him .
in that case he would return no more .
lady catherine might see him in her way through town .
and his engagement to bingley of coming again to netherfield must give way .
`` if .
therefore .
an excuse for not keeping his promise .
should come to his friend within a few days .
'' she added , `` i shall know how to understand it .
i shall then give over every expectation , every wish of his constancy .
if he is satisfied with only regretting me .
when he might have obtained my affections and hand , i shall soon cease to regret him at all . ''
* * * * * the surprise of the rest of the family .
on hearing who their visitor had been , was very great .
but they obligingly satisfied it , with the same kind of supposition , which had appeased mrs. bennet 's curiosity .
and elizabeth was spared from much teazing on the subject .
the next morning .
as she was going down stairs .
she was met by her father , who came out of his library with a letter in his hand .
`` lizzy , '' said he , `` i was going to look for you .
come into my room . ''
she followed him thither .
and her curiosity to know what he had to tell her .
was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner connected with the letter he held .
it suddenly struck her that it might be from lady catherine .
and she anticipated with dismay all the consequent explanations .
she followed her father to the fire place , and they both sat down .
he then said , `` i have received a letter this morning that has astonished me exceedingly .
as it principally concerns yourself , you ought to know its contents .
i did not know before , that i had two daughters on the brink of matrimony .
let me congratulate you , on a very important conquest . ''
the colour now rushed into elizabeth 's cheeks in the instantaneous conviction of its being a letter from the nephew .
instead of the aunt .
and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained himself at all .
or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to herself .
when her father continued , `` you look conscious .
young ladies have great penetration in such matters as these .
but i think i may defy even your sagacity , to discover the name of your admirer .
this letter is from mr .
collins . ''
`` from mr. collins !
and what can he have to say ? ''
`` something very much to the purpose of course .
he begins with congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter .
of which it seems he has been told , by some of the good-natured , gossiping lucases .
i shall not sport with your impatience , by reading what he says on that point .
what relates to yourself , is as follows .
`` having thus offered you the sincere congratulations of mrs. collins and myself on this happy event .
let me now add a short hint on the subject of another
: of which we have been advertised by the same authority .
your daughter elizabeth .
it is presumed .
will not long bear the name of bennet .
after her elder sister has resigned it .
and the chosen partner of her fate .
may be reasonably looked up to , as one of the most illustrious personages in this land . ''
`` can you possibly guess , lizzy , who is meant by this ? ''
`` this young gentleman is blessed in a peculiar way .
with every thing the heart of mortal can most desire , .
splendid property , noble kindred , and extensive patronage .
yet in spite of all these temptations .
let me warn my cousin elizabeth .
and yourself .
of what evils you may incur .
by a precipitate closure with this gentleman 's proposals .
which , of course , you will be inclined to take immediate advantage of . ''
`` have you any idea , lizzy , who this gentleman is ?
but now it comes out . ''
`` my motive for cautioning you , is as follows .
we have reason to imagine that his aunt .
lady catherine de bourgh , does not look on the match with a friendly eye . ''
`` mr. darcy , you see , is the man !
now , lizzy , i think i have surprised you .
could he .
or the lucases .
have pitched on any man .
within the circle of our acquaintance , whose name would have given the lie more effectually to what they related ?
mr. darcy .
who never looks at any woman but to see a blemish .
and who probably never looked at you in his life !
it is admirable ! ''
elizabeth tried to join in her father 's pleasantry , but could only force one most reluctant smile .
never had his wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to her .
`` are you not diverted ? ''
`` oh !
yes .
pray read on . ''
`` after mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her ladyship last night .
she immediately , with her usual condescension , expressed what she felt on the occasion .
when it became apparent .
that on the score of some family objections on the part of my cousin .
she would never give her consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match .
i thought it my duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin .
that she and her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about .
and not run hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned . ''
`` mr. collins moreover adds .
'' `` i am truly rejoiced that my cousin lydia 's sad business has been so well hushed up .
and am only concerned that their living together before the marriage took place , should be so generally known .
i must not .
however .
neglect the duties of my station .
or refrain from declaring my amazement .
at hearing that you received the young couple into your house as soon as they were married .
it was an encouragement of vice .
and had i been the rector of longbourn , i should very strenuously have opposed it .
you ought certainly to forgive them as a christian .
but never to admit them in your sight , or allow their names to be mentioned in your hearing . ''
`` that is his notion of christian forgiveness !
the rest of his letter is only about his dear charlotte's situation , and his expectation of a young olive-branch .
but , lizzy , you look as if you did not enjoy it .
you are not going to be missish , i hope , and pretend to be affronted at an idle report .
for what do we live .
but to make sport for our neighbours , and laugh at them in our turn ? ''
`` oh ! ''
cried elizabeth , `` i am excessively diverted .
but it is so strange ! ''
`` yes .
that is what makes it amusing .
had they fixed on any other man it would have been nothing .
but his perfect indifference , and your pointed dislike , make it so delightfully absurd !
much as i abominate writing , i would not give up mr. collins 's correspondence for any consideration .
nay .
when i read a letter of his .
i can not help giving him the preference even over wickham .
much as i value the impudence and hypocrisy of my son-in-law .
and pray , lizzy , what said lady catherine about this report ?
did she call to refuse her consent ? ''
to this question his daughter replied only with a laugh .
and as it had been asked without the least suspicion , she was not distressed by his repeating it .
elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her feelings appear what they were not .
it was necessary to laugh , when she would rather have cried .
her father had most cruelly mortified her .
by what he said of mr. darcy 's indifference .
and she could do nothing but wonder at such a want of penetration .
or fear that perhaps , instead of his seeing too little , she might have fancied too much .
instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend .
as elizabeth half expected mr. bingley to do .
he was able to bring darcy with him to longbourn before many days had passed after lady catherine's visit .
the gentlemen arrived early .
and .
before mrs. bennet had time to tell him of their having seen his aunt .
of which her daughter sat in momentary dread .
bingley , who wanted to be alone with jane , proposed their all walking out .
it was agreed to .
mrs. bennet was not in the habit of walking .
mary could never spare time , but the remaining five set off together .
bingley and jane , however , soon allowed the others to outstrip them .
they lagged behind , while elizabeth , kitty , and darcy , were to entertain each other .
very little was said by either .
kitty was too much afraid of him to talk .
elizabeth was secretly forming a desperate resolution .
and perhaps he might be doing the same .
they walked towards the lucases , because kitty wished to call upon maria .
and as elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern .
when kitty left them , she went boldly on with him alone .
now was the moment for her resolution to be executed .
and .
while her courage was high , she immediately said , `` mr. darcy , i am a very selfish creature .
and .
for the sake of giving relief to my own feelings .
care not how much i may be wounding your 's .
i can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my poor sister .
ever since i have known it .
i have been most anxious to acknowledge to you how gratefully i feel it .
were it known to the rest of my family .
i should not have merely my own gratitude to express . ''
`` i am sorry .
exceedingly sorry .
'' replied darcy .
in a tone of surprise and emotion .
`` that you have ever been informed of what may , in a mistaken light , have given you uneasiness .
i did not think mrs. gardiner was so little to be trusted . ''
`` you must not blame my aunt .
lydia 's thoughtlessness first betrayed to me that you had been concerned in the matter .
and , of course , i could not rest till i knew the particulars .
let me thank you again and again .
in the name of all my family .
for that generous compassion which induced you to take so much trouble .
and bear so many mortifications , for the sake of discovering them . ''
`` if you will thank me , '' he replied , `` let it be for yourself alone .
that the wish of giving happiness to you .
might add force to the other inducements which led me on , i shall not attempt to deny .
but your family owe me nothing .
much as i respect them , i believe , i thought only of you . ''
elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word .
after a short pause , her companion added , `` you are too generous to trifle with me .
if your feelings are still what they were last april , tell me so at once .
my affections and wishes are unchanged .
but one word from you will silence me on this subject for ever . ''
elizabeth feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of his situation , now forced herself to speak .
and immediately .
though not very fluently .
gave him to understand .
that her sentiments had undergone so material a change .
since the period to which he alluded .
as to make her receive with gratitude and pleasure , his present assurances .
the happiness which this reply produced , was such as he had probably never felt before .
and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as warmly
as a man violently in love can be supposed to do .
had elizabeth been able to encounter his eye .
she might have seen how well the expression of heart-felt delight , diffused over his face , became him .
but .
though she could not look .
she could listen .
and he told her of feelings .
which , in proving of what importance she was to him , made his affection every moment more valuable .
they walked on , without knowing in what direction .
there was too much to be thought .
and felt , and said , for attention to any other objects .
she soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding to the efforts of his aunt .
who did call on him in her return through london .
and there relate her journey to longbourn , its motive , and the substance of her conversation with elizabeth .
dwelling emphatically on every expression of the latter .
which .
in her ladyship 's apprehension .
peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance .
in the belief that such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that promise from her nephew .
which she had refused to give .
but , unluckily for her ladyship , its effect had been exactly contrariwise .
`` it taught me to hope .
'' said he , `` as i had scarcely ever allowed myself to hope before .
i knew enough of your disposition to be certain .
that .
had you been absolutely .
irrevocably decided against me , you would have acknowledged it to lady catherine , frankly and openly . ''
elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied .
`` yes , you know enough of my frankness to believe me capable of that .
after abusing you so abominably to your face .
i could have no scruple in abusing you to all your relations . ''
`` what did you say of me , that i did not deserve ?
for .
though your accusations were ill-founded .
formed on mistaken premises , my behaviour to you at the time , had merited the severest reproof .
it was unpardonable .
i can not think of it without abhorrence . ''
`` we will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that evening , '' said elizabeth .
`` the conduct of neither , if strictly examined , will be irreproachable .
but since then , we have both , i hope , improved in civility . ''
`` i can not be so easily reconciled to myself .
the recollection of what i then said .
of my conduct .
my manners .
my expressions during the whole of it .
is now , and has been many months , inexpressibly painful to me .
your reproof .
so well applied , i shall never forget : 'had you behaved in a more gentleman-like manner . '
those were your words .
you know not .
you can scarcely conceive .
how they have tortured me.. though it was some time .
i confess , before i was reasonable enough to allow their justice . ''
`` i was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an impression .
i had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such a way . ''
`` i can easily believe it .
you thought me then devoid of every proper feeling , i am sure you did .
the turn of your countenance i shall never forget .
as you said that i could not have addressed you in any possible way .
that would induce you to accept me . ''
`` oh !
do not repeat what i then said .
these recollections will not do at all .
i assure you , that i have long been most heartily ashamed of it . ''
darcy mentioned his letter .
`` did it , '' said he , `` did it soon make you think better of me ?
did you , on reading it , give any credit to its contents ? ''
she explained what its effect on her had been , and how gradually all her former prejudices had been removed .
`` i knew .
'' said he , `` that what i wrote must give you pain , but it was necessary .
i hope you have destroyed the letter .
there was one part especially .
the opening of it , which i should dread your having the power of reading again .
i can remember some expressions which might justly make you hate me . ''
`` the letter shall certainly be burnt , if you believe it essential to the preservation of my regard .
but .
though we have both reason to think my opinions not entirely unalterable .
they are not , i hope , quite so easily changed as that implies . ''
`` when i wrote that letter .
'' replied darcy .
`` i believed myself perfectly calm and cool .
but i am since convinced that it was written in a dreadful bitterness of spirit . ''
`` the letter , perhaps , began in bitterness , but it did not end so .
the adieu is charity itself .
but think no more of the letter .
the feelings of the person who wrote .
and the person who received it .
are now so widely different from what they were then .
that every unpleasant circumstance attending it , ought to be forgotten .
you must learn some of my philosophy .
think only of the past as its remembrance gives you pleasure . ''
`` i can not give you credit for any philosophy of the kind .
your retrospections must be so totally void of reproach .
that the contentment arising from them , is not of philosophy , but what is much better , of ignorance .
but with me , it is not so .
painful recollections will intrude , which can not , which ought not to be repelled .
i have been a selfish being all my life , in practice , though not in principle .
as a child i was taught what was right , but i was not taught to correct my temper .
i was given good principles , but left to follow them in pride and conceit .
unfortunately an only son .
( for many years an only child ) i was spoilt by my parents .
who though good themselves .
( my father particularly .
all that was benevolent and amiable .
) allowed .
encouraged .
almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing .
to care for none beyond my own family circle .
to think meanly of all the rest of the world .
to wish at least to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own .
such i was , from eight to eight and twenty .
and such i might still have been but for you , dearest , loveliest elizabeth !
what do i not owe you !
you taught me a lesson , hard indeed at first , but most advantageous .
by you , i was properly humbled .
i came to you without a doubt of my reception .
you shewed me how insufficient were all my pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased . ''
`` had you then persuaded yourself that i should ? ''
`` indeed i had .
what will you think of my vanity ?
i believed you to be wishing , expecting my addresses . ''
`` my manners must have been in fault , but not intentionally i assure you .
i never meant to deceive you , but my spirits might often lead me wrong .
how you must have hated me after that evening ? ''
`` hate you !
i was angry perhaps at first , but my anger soon began to take a proper direction . ''
`` i am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me .
when we met at pemberley .
you blamed me for coming ? ''
`` no indeed .
i felt nothing but surprise . ''
`` your surprise could not be greater than mine in being noticed by you .
my conscience told me that i deserved no extraordinary politeness .
and i confess that i did not expect to receive more than my due . ''
`` my object then .
'' replied darcy .
`` was to shew you .
by every civility in my power , that i was not so mean as to resent the past .
and i hoped to obtain your forgiveness .
to lessen your ill opinion , by letting you see that your reproofs had been attended to .
how soon any other wishes introduced themselves i can hardly tell .
but i believe in about half an hour after i had seen you . ''
he then told her of georgiana 's delight in her acquaintance , and of her disappointment at its sudden interruption .
which naturally leading to the cause of that interruption .
she soon learnt that his resolution of following her from derbyshire in quest of her sister .
had been formed before he quitted the inn .
and that his gravity and thoughtfulness there .
had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must comprehend .
she expressed her gratitude again .
but it was too painful a subject to each , to be dwelt on farther .
after walking several miles in a leisurely manner .
and too busy to know any thing about it .
they found at last , on examining their watches , that it was time to be at home .
`` what could become of mr. bingley and jane ! ''
was a wonder which introduced the discussion of their affairs .
darcy was delighted with their engagement .
his friend had given him the earliest information of it .
`` i must ask whether you were surprised ? ''
said elizabeth .
`` not at all .
when i went away , i felt that it would soon happen . ''
`` that is to say , you had given your permission .
i guessed as much . ''
and though he exclaimed at the term , she found that it had been pretty much the case .
`` on the evening before my going to london .
'' said he `` i made a confession to him .
which i believe i ought to have made long ago .
i told him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his affairs , absurd and impertinent .
his surprise was great .
he had never had the slightest suspicion .
i told him .
moreover .
that i believed myself mistaken in supposing , as i had done , that your sister was indifferent to him .
and as i could easily perceive that his attachment to her was unabated .
i felt no doubt of their happiness together . ''
elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his friend .
`` did you speak from your own observation .
'' said she .
`` when you told him that my sister loved him , or merely from my information last spring ? ''
`` from the former .
i had narrowly observed her during the two visits which i had lately made her here .
and i was convinced of her affection . ''
`` and your assurance of it , i suppose , carried immediate conviction to him . ''
`` it did .
bingley is most unaffectedly modest .
his diffidence had prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case .
but his reliance on mine , made every thing easy .
i was obliged to confess one thing , which for a time , and not unjustly , offended him .
i could not allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months last winter .
that i had known it , and purposely kept it from him .
he was angry .
but his anger .
i am persuaded , lasted no longer than he remained in any doubt of your sister 's sentiments .
he has heartily forgiven me now . ''
elizabeth longed to observe that mr. bingley had been a most delightful friend .
so easily guided that his worth was invaluable .
but she checked herself .
she remembered that he had yet to learn to be laught at .
and it was rather too early to begin .
in anticipating the happiness of bingley .
which of course was to be inferior only to his own .
he continued the conversation till they reached the house .
in the hall they parted .
`` my dear lizzy , where can you have been walking to ? ''
was a question which elizabeth received from jane as soon as she entered the room .
and from all the others when they sat down to table .
she had only to say in reply .
that they had wandered about , till she was beyond her own knowledge .
she coloured as she spoke .
but neither that , nor any thing else , awakened a suspicion of the truth .
the evening passed quietly , unmarked by any thing extraordinary .
the acknowledged lovers talked and laughed , the unacknowledged were silent .
darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth .
and elizabeth , agitated and confused , rather knew that she was happy , than felt herself to be so .
for , besides the immediate embarrassment , there were other evils before her .
she anticipated what would be felt in the family when her situation became known .
she was aware that no one liked him but jane .
and even feared that with the others it was a dislike
which not all his fortune and consequence might do away .
at night she opened her heart to jane .
though suspicion was very far from miss bennet 's general habits , she was absolutely incredulous here .
`` you are joking , lizzy .
this can not be ! .
engaged to mr. darcy !
no , no , you shall not deceive me .
i know it to be impossible . ''
`` this is a wretched beginning indeed !
my sole dependence was on you .
and i am sure nobody else will believe me , if you do not .
yet , indeed , i am in earnest .
i speak nothing but the truth .
he still loves me , and we are engaged . ''
jane looked at her doubtingly .
`` oh , lizzy !
it can not be .
i know how much you dislike him . ''
`` you know nothing of the matter .
that is all to be forgot .
perhaps i did not always love him so well as i do now .
but in such cases as these , a good memory is unpardonable .
this is the last time i shall ever remember it myself . ''
miss bennet still looked all amazement .
elizabeth again , and more seriously assured her of its truth .
`` good heaven !
can it be really so !
yet now i must believe you , '' cried jane .
`` my dear , dear lizzy , i would .
i do congratulate you .
but are you certain ?
forgive the question .
are you quite certain that you can be happy with him ? ''
`` there can be no doubt of that .
it is settled between us already , that we are to be the happiest couple in the world .
but are you pleased , jane ?
shall you like to have such a brother ? ''
`` very , very much .
nothing could give either bingley or myself more delight .
but we considered it , we talked of it as impossible .
and do you really love him quite well enough ?
oh , lizzy !
do any thing rather than marry without affection .
are you quite sure that you feel what you ought to do ? ''
`` oh , yes !
you will only think i feel more than i ought to do , when i tell you all . ''
`` what do you mean ? ''
`` why , i must confess , that i love him better than i do bingley .
i am afraid you will be angry . ''
`` my dearest sister , now be be serious .
i want to talk very seriously .
let me know every thing that i am to know , without delay .
will you tell me how long you have loved him ? ''
`` it has been coming on so gradually , that i hardly know when it began .
but i believe i must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds at pemberley . ''
another intreaty that she would be serious , however , produced the desired effect .
and she soon satisfied jane by her solemn assurances of attachment .
when convinced on that article , miss bennet had nothing farther to wish .
`` now i am quite happy , '' said she , `` for you will be as happy as myself .
i always had a value for him .
were it for nothing but his love of you , i must always have esteemed him .
but now .
as bingley 's friend and your husband , there can be only bingley and yourself more dear to me .
but lizzy , you have been very sly , very reserved with me .
how little did you tell me of what passed at pemberley and lambton !
i owe all that i know of it , to another , not to you . ''
elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy .
she had been unwilling to mention bingley .
and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made her equally avoid the name of his friend .
but now she would no longer conceal from her , his share in lydia 's marriage .
all was acknowledged , and half the night spent in conversation .
* * * * * `` good gracious ! ''
cried mrs. bennet .
as she stood at a window the next morning .
`` if that disagreeable mr. darcy is not coming here again with our dear bingley !
what can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here ?
i had no notion but he would go a shooting .
or something or other , and not disturb us with his company .
what shall we do with him ?
lizzy , you must walk out with him again , that he may not be in bingley's way . ''
elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal .
yet was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an epithet .
as soon as they entered .
bingley looked at her so expressively .
and shook hands with such warmth , as left no doubt of his good information .
and he soon afterwards said aloud .
`` mr. bennet , have you no more lanes hereabouts in which lizzy may lose her way again to-day ? ''
`` i advise mr. darcy .
and lizzy , and kitty , '' said mrs. bennet , `` to walk to oakham mount this morning .
it is a nice long walk , and mr. darcy has never seen the view . ''
`` it may do very well for the others , '' replied mr. bingley .
`` but i am sure it will be too much for kitty .
wont it , kitty ? ''
kitty owned that she had rather stay at home .
darcy professed a great curiosity to see the view from the mount , and elizabeth silently consented .
as she went up stairs to get ready .
mrs. bennet followed her .
saying .
`` i am quite sorry .
lizzy , that you should be forced to have that disagreeable man all to yourself .
but i hope you will not mind it : it is all for jane 's sake , you know .
and there is no occasion for talking to him , except just now and then .
so , do not put yourself to inconvenience . ''
during their walk .
it was resolved that mr. bennet 's consent should be asked in the course of the evening .
elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her mother 's .
she could not determine how her mother would take it .
sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man .
but whether she were violently set against the match .
or violently delighted with it .
it was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to her sense .
and she could no more bear that mr. darcy should hear the first raptures of her joy .
than the first vehemence of her disapprobation .
* * * * * in the evening .
soon after mr. bennet withdrew to the library .
she saw mr. darcy rise also and follow him , and her agitation on seeing it was extreme .
she did not fear her father 's opposition .
but he was going to be made unhappy .
and that it should be through her means .
that she .
his favourite child .
should be distressing him by her choice .
should be filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her .
was a wretched reflection .
and she sat in misery till mr. darcy appeared again .
when , looking at him , she was a little relieved by his smile .
in a few minutes he approached the table where she was sitting with kitty .
and .
while pretending to admire her work .
said in a whisper , `` go to your father , he wants you in the library . ''
she was gone directly .
her father was walking about the room , looking grave and anxious .
`` lizzy , '' said he , `` what are you doing ?
are you out of your senses , to be accepting this man ?
have not you always hated him ? ''
how earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more reasonable , her expressions more moderate !
it would have spared her from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give .
but they were now necessary , and she assured him with some confusion , of her attachment to mr. darcy .
`` or in other words , you are determined to have him .
he is rich , to be sure , and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than jane .
but will they make you happy ? ''
`` have you any other objection , '' said elizabeth , `` than your belief of my indifference ? ''
`` none at all .
we all know him to be a proud , unpleasant sort of man .
but this would be nothing if you really liked him . ''
`` i do .
i do like him , '' she replied , with tears in her eyes , `` i love him .
indeed he has no improper pride .
he is perfectly amiable .
you do not know what he really is .
then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in such terms . ''
`` lizzy , '' said her father , `` i have given him my consent .
he is the kind of man .
indeed , to whom i should never dare refuse any thing , which he condescended to ask .
i now give it to you , if you are resolved on having him .
but let me advise you to think better of it .
i know your disposition , lizzy .
i know that you could be neither happy nor respectable , unless you truly esteemed your husband .
unless you looked up to him as a superior .
your lively talents would place you in the greatest danger in an unequal marriage .
you could scarcely escape discredit and misery .
my child , let me not have the grief of seeing you unable to respect your partner in life .
you know not what you are about . ''
elizabeth , still more affected , was earnest and solemn in her reply .
and at length .
by repeated assurances that mr. darcy was really the object of her choice .
by explaining the gradual change which her estimation of him had undergone .
relating her absolute certainty that his affection was not the work of a day .
but had stood the test of many months suspense .
and enumerating with energy all his good qualities .
she did conquer her father 's incredulity , and reconcile him to the match .
`` well .
my dear , '' said he , when she ceased speaking , `` i have no more to say .
if this be the case , he deserves you .
i could not have parted with you , my lizzy , to any one less worthy . ''
to complete the favourable impression , she then told him what mr. darcy had voluntarily done for lydia .
he heard her with astonishment .
`` this is an evening of wonders , indeed !
and so , darcy did every thing .
made up the match , gave the money , paid the fellow 's debts , and got him his commission !
so much the better .
it will save me a world of trouble and economy .
had it been your uncle 's doing , i must and would have paid him .
but these violent young lovers carry every thing their own way .
i shall offer to pay him to-morrow .
he will rant and storm about his love for you .
and there will be an end of the matter . ''
he then recollected her embarrassment a few days before , on his reading mr. collins 's letter .
and after laughing at her some time , allowed her at last to go .
saying .
as she quitted the room .
`` if any young men come for mary or kitty .
send them in , for i am quite at leisure . ''
elizabeth 's mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight .
and .
after half an hour 's quiet reflection in her own room .
she was able to join the others with tolerable composure .
every thing was too recent for gaiety , but the evening passed tranquilly away .
there was no longer any thing material to be dreaded .
and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time .
when her mother went up to her dressing-room at night , she followed her , and made the important communication .
its effect was most extraordinary .
for on first hearing it , mrs. bennet sat quite still , and unable to utter a syllable .
nor was it under many , many minutes , that she could comprehend what she heard .
though not in general backward to credit what was for the advantage of her family .
or that came in the shape of a lover to any of them .
she began at length to recover .
to fidget about in her chair , get up , sit down again , wonder , and bless herself .
`` good gracious !
lord bless me !
only think !
dear me !
mr. darcy !
who would have thought it !
and is it really true ?
oh !
my sweetest lizzy !
how rich and how great you will be !
what pin-money , what jewels , what carriages you will have !
jane 's is nothing to it .
nothing at all .
i am so pleased .
so happy .
such a charming man ! .
so handsome !
so tall ! .
oh , my dear lizzy !
pray apologise for my having disliked him so much before .
i hope he will overlook it .
dear , dear lizzy .
a house in town !
every thing that is charming !
three daughters married !
ten thousand a year !
oh , lord !
what will become of me .
i shall go distracted . ''
this was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted : and elizabeth .
rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself , soon went away .
but before she had been three minutes in her own room , her mother followed her .
`` my dearest child , '' she cried , `` i can think of nothing else !
ten thousand a year , and very likely more !
't is as good as a lord !
and a special licence .
you must and shall be married by a special licence .
but my dearest love .
tell me what dish mr. darcy is particularly fond of , that i may have it to-morrow . ''
this was a sad omen of what her mother 's behaviour to the gentleman himself might be .
and elizabeth found .
that though in the certain possession of his warmest affection .
and secure of her relations' consent , there was still something to be wished for .
but the morrow passed off much better than she expected .
for mrs. bennet luckily stood in such awe of her intended son-in-law .
that she ventured not to speak to him .
unless it was in her power to offer him any attention , or mark her deference for his opinion .
elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get acquainted with him .
and mr. bennet soon assured her that he was rising every hour in his esteem .
`` i admire all my three sons-in-law highly , '' said he .
`` wickham , perhaps , is my favourite .
but i think i shall like your husband quite as well as jane 's . ''
elizabeth 's spirits soon rising to playfulness again .
she wanted mr. darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her .
`` how could you begin ? ''
said she .
`` i can comprehend your going on charmingly , when you had once made a beginning .
but what could set you off in the first place ? ''
`` i can not fix on the hour .
or the spot , or the look , or the words , which laid the foundation .
it is too long ago .
i was in the middle before i knew that i had begun . ''
`` my beauty you had early withstood , and as for my manners .
my behaviour to you was at least always bordering on the uncivil .
and i never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not .
now be sincere .
did you admire me for my impertinence ? ''
`` for the liveliness of your mind , i did . ''
`` you may as well call it impertinence at once .
it was very little less .
the fact is , that you were sick of civility , of deference , of officious attention .
you were disgusted with the women who were always speaking and looking , and thinking for your approbation alone .
i roused , and interested you , because i was so unlike them .
had you not been really amiable you would have hated me for it .
but in spite of the pains you took to disguise yourself , your feelings were always noble and just .
and in your heart , you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously courted you .
there .
i have saved you the trouble of accounting for it .
and really , all things considered , i begin to think it perfectly reasonable .
to be sure , you knew no actual good of me .
but nobody thinks of that when they fall in love . ''
`` was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to jane , while she was ill at netherfield ? ''
`` dearest jane !
who could have done less for her ?
but make a virtue of it by all means .
my good qualities are under your protection , and you are to exaggerate them as much as possible .
and .
in return .
it belongs to me to find occasions for teazing and quarrelling with you as often as may be .
and i shall begin directly by asking you what made you so unwilling to come to the point at last .
what made you so shy of me , when you first called , and afterwards dined here ?
why , especially , when you called , did you look as if you did not care about me ? ''
`` because you were grave and silent , and gave me no encouragement . ''
`` but i was embarrassed . ''
`` and so was i . ''
`` you might have talked to me more when you came to dinner . ''
`` a man who had felt less , might . ''
`` how unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give .
and that i should be so reasonable as to admit it !
but i wonder how long you would have gone on , if you had been left to yourself .
i wonder when you would have spoken , if i had not asked you !
my resolution of thanking you for your kindness to lydia had certainly great effect .
too much , i am afraid .
for what becomes of the moral .
if our comfort springs from a breach of promise , for i ought not to have mentioned the subject ?
this will never do . ''
`` you need not distress yourself .
the moral will be perfectly fair .
lady catherine 's unjustifiable endeavours to separate us , were the means of removing all my doubts .
i am not indebted for my present happiness to your eager desire of expressing your gratitude .
i was not in a humour to wait for any opening of your 's .
my aunt 's intelligence had given me hope , and i was determined at once to know every thing . ''
`` lady catherine has been of infinite use .
which ought to make her happy , for she loves to be of use .
but tell me , what did you come down to netherfield for ?
was it merely to ride to longbourn and be embarrassed ?
or had you intended any more serious consequence ? ''
`` my real purpose was to see you .
and to judge , if i could , whether i might ever hope to make you love me .
my avowed one .
or what i avowed to myself .
was to see whether your sister were still partial to bingley .
and if she were , to make the confession to him which i have since made . ''
`` shall you ever have courage to announce to lady catherine , what is to befall her ? ''
`` i am more likely to want time than courage , elizabeth .
but it ought to be done .
and if you will give me a sheet of paper , it shall be done directly . ''
`` and if i had not a letter to write myself .
i might sit by you , and admire the evenness of your writing , as another young lady once did .
but i have an aunt , too , who must not be longer neglected . ''
from an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with mr. darcy had been over-rated .
elizabeth had never yet answered mrs. gardiner's long letter .
but now .
having that to communicate which she knew would be most welcome .
she was almost ashamed to find .
that her uncle and aunt had already lost three days of happiness .
and immediately wrote as follows : `` i would have thanked you before .
my dear aunt .
as i ought to have done , for your long , kind , satisfactory , detail of particulars .
but to say the truth , i was too cross to write .
you supposed more than really existed .
but now suppose as much as you chuse .
give a loose to your fancy .
indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the subject will afford .
and unless you believe me actually married , you can not greatly err .
you must write again very soon , and praise him a great deal more than you did in your last .
i thank you , again and again , for not going to the lakes .
how could i be so silly as to wish it !
your idea of the ponies is delightful .
we will go round the park every day .
i am the happiest creature in the world .
perhaps other people have said so before , but not one with such justice .
i am happier even than jane .
she only smiles , i laugh .
mr. darcy sends you all the love in the world , that he can spare from me .
you are all to come to pemberley at christmas .
your 's , & c. '' mr. darcy 's letter to lady catherine , was in a different style .
and still different from either , was what mr. bennet sent to mr. collins , in reply to his last .
`` dear sir , `` i must trouble you once more for congratulations .
elizabeth will soon be the wife of mr. darcy .
console lady catherine as well as you can .
but , if i were you , i would stand by the nephew .
he has more to give .
`` your 's sincerely .
& c. '' miss bingley 's congratulations to her brother .
on his approaching marriage , were all that was affectionate and insincere .
she wrote even to jane on the occasion .
to express her delight , and repeat all her former professions of regard .
jane was not deceived , but she was affected .
and though feeling no reliance on her .
could not help writing her a much kinder answer than she knew was deserved .
the joy which miss darcy expressed on receiving similar information .
was as sincere as her brother 's in sending it .
four sides of paper were insufficient to contain all her delight .
and all her earnest desire of being loved by her sister .
before any answer could arrive from mr. collins .
or any congratulations to elizabeth .
from his wife , the longbourn family heard that the collinses were come themselves to lucas lodge .
the reason of this sudden removal was soon evident .
lady catherine had been rendered so exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew 's letter .
that charlotte , really rejoicing in the match , was anxious to get away till the storm was blown over .
at such a moment .
the arrival of her friend was a sincere pleasure to elizabeth .
though in the course of their meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought .
when she saw mr. darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her husband .
he bore it however with admirable calmness .
he could even listen to sir william lucas .
when he complimented him on carrying away the brightest jewel of the country .
and expressed his hopes of their all meeting frequently at st. james 's , with very decent composure .
if he did shrug his shoulders , it was not till sir william was out of sight .
mrs. philips 's vulgarity was another , and perhaps a greater tax on his forbearance .
and though mrs. philips .
as well as her sister .
stood in too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which bingley 's good humour encouraged .
yet , whenever she did speak , she must be vulgar .
nor was her respect for him .
though it made her more quiet , at all likely to make her more elegant .
elizabeth did all she could .
to shield him from the frequent notice of either .
and was ever anxious to keep him to herself .
and to those of her family with whom he might converse without mortification .
and though the uncomfortable feelings arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure .
it added to the hope of the future .
and she looked forward with delight to the time when they
should be removed from society so little pleasing to either .
to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at pemberley .
happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which
mrs. bennet got rid of her two most deserving daughters .
with what delighted pride she afterwards visited mrs. bingley and talked of mrs. darcy may be guessed .
i wish i could say .
for the sake of her family .
that the accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of her children .
produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible .
amiable , well-informed woman for the rest of her life .
though perhaps it was lucky for her husband .
who might not have relished domestic felicity in so unusual a form .
that she still was occasionally nervous and invariably silly .
mr. bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly .
his affection for her drew him oftener from home than any thing else could do .
he delighted in going to pemberley , especially when he was least expected .
mr. bingley and jane remained at netherfield only a twelvemonth .
so near a vicinity to her mother and meryton relations was not desirable even to his easy temper .
or her affectionate heart .
the darling wish of his sisters was then gratified .
he bought an estate in a neighbouring county to derbyshire .
and jane and elizabeth .
in addition to every other source of happiness , were within thirty miles of each other .
kitty , to her very material advantage , spent the chief of her time with her two elder sisters .
in society so superior to what she had generally known , her improvement was great .
she was not of so ungovernable a temper as lydia .
and .
removed from the influence of lydia 's example .
she became , by proper attention and management , less irritable , less ignorant , and less insipid .
from the farther disadvantage of lydia's society she was of course carefully kept .
and though mrs. wickham frequently invited her to come and stay with her .
with the promise of balls and young men , her father would never consent to her going .
mary was the only daughter who remained at home .
and she was necessarily drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by mrs. bennet 's being quite unable to sit alone .
mary was obliged to mix more with the world , but she could still moralize over every morning visit .
and as she was no longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters ' beauty and her own .
it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without much reluctance .
as for wickham and lydia , their characters suffered no revolution from the marriage of her sisters .
he bore with philosophy the conviction that elizabeth must now become acquainted with
whatever of his ingratitude and falsehood had before been unknown to her .
and in spite of every thing .
was not wholly without hope that darcy might yet be prevailed on to make his fortune .
the congratulatory letter which elizabeth received from lydia on her marriage .
explained to her that .
by his wife at least , if not by himself , such a hope was cherished .
the letter was to this effect : `` my dear lizzy , `` i wish you joy .
if you love mr. darcy half as well as i do my dear wickham , you must be very happy .
it is a great comfort to have you so rich .
and when you have nothing else to do , i hope you will think of us .
i am sure wickham would like a place at court very much .
and i do not think we shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help .
any place would do , of about three or four hundred a year .
but , however , do not speak to mr. darcy about it , if you had rather not .
`` yours .
& c. '' as it happened that elizabeth had much rather not .
she endeavoured in her answer to put an end to every intreaty and expectation of the kind .
such relief .
however .
as it was in her power to afford .
by the practice of what might be called economy in her own private expences , she frequently sent them .
it had always been evident to her that such an income as theirs .
under the direction of two persons so extravagant in their wants .
and heedless of the future , must be very insufficient to their support .
and whenever they changed their quarters .
either jane or herself were sure of being applied to , for some little assistance towards discharging their bills .
their manner of living .
even when the restoration of peace dismissed them to a home , was unsettled in the extreme .
they were always moving from place to place in quest of a cheap situation .
and always spending more than they ought .
his affection for her soon sunk into indifference .
her 's lasted a little longer .
and in spite of her youth and her manners .
she retained all the claims to reputation which her marriage had given her .
though darcy could never receive him at pemberley .
yet , for elizabeth 's sake , he assisted him farther in his profession .
lydia was occasionally a visitor there , when her husband was gone to enjoy himself in london or bath .
and with the bingleys they both of them frequently staid so long .
that even bingley 's good humour was overcome .
and he proceeded so far as to talk of giving them a hint to be gone .
miss bingley was very deeply mortified by darcy 's marriage .
but as she thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at pemberley , she dropt all her resentment .
was fonder than ever of georgiana .
almost as attentive to darcy as heretofore , and paid off every arrear of civility to elizabeth .
pemberley was now georgiana 's home .
and the attachment of the sisters was exactly what darcy had hoped to see .
they were able to love each other , even as well as they intended .
georgiana had the highest opinion in the world of elizabeth .
though at first she often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm .
at her lively , sportive , manner of talking to her brother .
he .
who had always inspired in herself a respect which almost overcame her affection .
she now saw the object of open pleasantry .
her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in her way .
by elizabeth 's instructions she began to comprehend that a woman may take liberties with her husband .
which a brother will not always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself .
lady catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew .
and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character .
in her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement .
she sent him language so very abusive .
especially of elizabeth , that for some time all intercourse was at an end .
but at length .
by elizabeth 's persuasion , he was prevailed on to overlook the offence , and seek a reconciliation .
and .
after a little farther resistance on the part of his aunt .
her resentment gave way .
either to her affection for him , or her curiosity to see how his wife conducted herself .
and she condescended to wait on them at pemberley .
in spite of that pollution which its woods had received .
not merely from the presence of such a mistress .
but the visits of her uncle and aunt from the city .
with the gardiners , they were always on the most intimate terms .
darcy , as well as elizabeth , really loved them .
and they were both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who .
by bringing her into derbyshire , had been the means of uniting them .
most of the adventures recorded in this book really occurred .
one or two were experiences of my own , the rest those of boys who were schoolmates of mine .
huck finn is drawn from life .
tom sawyer also , but not from an individual .
he is a combination of the characteristics of three boys whom i knew .
and therefore belongs to the composite order of architecture .
the odd superstitions touched upon were all prevalent among children and
slaves in the west at the period of this story .
that is to say , thirty or forty years ago .
although my book is intended mainly for the entertainment of boys and girls .
i hope it will not be shunned by men and women on that account .
for part of my plan has been to try to pleasantly remind adults of what they once were themselves .
and of how they felt and thought and talked , and what queer enterprises they sometimes engaged in .
the author .
hartford , 1876 .
`` tom ! ''
no answer .
`` tom ! ''
no answer .
`` what 's gone with that boy , i wonder ?
you tom ! ''
no answer .
the old lady pulled her spectacles down and looked over them about the room .
then she put them up and looked out under them .
she seldom or never looked through them for so small a thing as a boy .
they were her state pair .
the pride of her heart , and were built for `` style , '' not service .
she could have seen through a pair of stove-lids just as well .
she looked perplexed for a moment .
and then said .
not fiercely .
but still loud enough for the furniture to hear : `` well .
i lay if i get hold of you i'll. ``
she did not finish .
for by this time she was bending down and punching under the bed with the broom .
and so she needed breath to punctuate the punches with .
she resurrected nothing but the cat .
`` i never did see the beat of that boy ! ''
she went to the open door and stood in it and looked out
among the tomato vines and `` jimpson '' weeds that constituted the garden .
no tom .
so she lifted up her voice at an angle calculated for distance and shouted : `` y-o-u-u tom ! ''
there was a slight noise behind her and she turned just in time to
seize a small boy by the slack of his roundabout and arrest his flight .
`` there !
i might ' a ' thought of that closet .
what you been doing in there ? ''
`` nothing . ''
`` nothing !
look at your hands .
and look at your mouth .
what is that truck ? ''
`` i do n't know , aunt . ''
`` well , i know .
it 's jam .
that 's what it is .
forty times i 've said if you did n't let that jam alone i 'd skin you .
hand me that switch . ''
the switch hovered in the air .
the peril was desperate .
`` my !
look behind you , aunt ! ''
the old lady whirled round , and snatched her skirts out of danger .
the lad fled on the instant , scrambled up the high board-fence , and disappeared over it .
his aunt polly stood surprised a moment , and then broke into a gentle laugh .
`` hang the boy , ca n't i never learn anything ?
ai n't he played me tricks enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time ?
but old fools is the biggest fools there is .
ca n't learn an old dog new tricks , as the saying is .
but my goodness .
he never plays them alike , two days , and how is a body to know what 's coming ?
he 'pears to know just how long he can torment me before i get my dander up .
and he knows if he can make out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh .
it 's all down again and i ca n't hit him a lick .
i ai n't doing my duty by that boy , and that's the lord 's truth , goodness knows .
spare the rod and spile the child , as the good book says .
i 'm a laying up sin and suffering for us both , i know .
he 's full of the old scratch , but laws-a-me !
he 's my own dead sister 's boy .
poor thing , and i ai n't got the heart to lash him , somehow .
every time i let him off .
my conscience does hurt me so , and every time i hit him my old heart most breaks .
well-a-well .
man that is born of woman is of few days and full of trouble .
as the scripture says , and i reckon it 's so .
he 'll play hookey this evening .
* and [ * southwestern for `` afternoon '' ] i 'll just be obleeged to make him work .
tomorrow , to punish him .
it 's mighty hard to make him work saturdays .
when all the boys is having holiday .
but he hates work more than he hates anything else .
and i 've got to do some of my duty by him .
or i 'll be the ruination of the child . ''
tom did play hookey , and he had a very good time .
he got back home barely in season to help jim .
the small colored boy , saw next-day 's wood and split the kindlings before supper .
at least he was there in time to tell his adventures to jim while jim did three-fourths of the work .
tom 's younger brother ( or rather half-brother ) sid was already
through with his part of the work ( picking up chips ) .
for he was a quiet boy , and had no adventurous , trouble-some ways .
while tom was eating his supper .
and stealing sugar as opportunity offered .
aunt polly asked him questions that were full of guile , and very deep .
for she wanted to trap him into damaging revealments .
like many other simple-hearted souls .
it was her pet vanity to believe she was endowed with a talent for dark and mysterious diplomacy .
and she loved to contemplate her most transparent devices as marvels of low cunning .
said she : `` tom , it was middling warm in school , war n't it ? ''
`` yes 'm . ''
`` powerful warm , war n't it ? ''
`` yes 'm . ''
`` did n't you want to go in a-swimming , tom ? ''
a bit of a scare shot through tom .
a touch of uncomfortable suspicion .
he searched aunt polly 's face , but it told him nothing .
so he said : `` no 'm .
well , not very much . ''
the old lady reached out her hand and felt tom 's shirt .
and said : `` but you ai n't too warm now , though . ''
and it flattered her to reflect that she had discovered that the shirt was
dry without anybody knowing that that was what she had in her mind .
but in spite of her , tom knew where the wind lay , now .
so he forestalled what might be the next move : `` some of us pumped on our heads .
mine 's damp yet .
see ? ''
aunt polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of circumstantial evidence , and missed a trick .
then she had a new inspiration : `` tom .
you did n't have to undo your shirt collar where i sewed it .
to pump on your head , did you ?
unbutton your jacket ! ''
the trouble vanished out of tom 's face .
he opened his jacket .
his shirt collar was securely sewed .
`` bother !
well , go 'long with you .
i 'd made sure you 'd played hookey and been a-swimming .
but i forgive ye , tom .
i reckon you 're a kind of a singed cat , as the saying is .
better ' n you look .
this time . ''
she was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried .
and half glad that tom had stumbled into obedient conduct for once .
but sidney said : `` well .
now , if i did n't think you sewed his collar with white thread , but it 's black . ''
`` why , i did sew it with white !
tom ! ''
but tom did not wait for the rest .
as he went out at the door he said : `` siddy , i 'll lick you for that . ''
in a safe place tom examined two large needles which were thrust into the lapels of his jacket .
and had thread bound about them .
one needle carried white thread and the other black .
he said : `` she 'd never noticed if it had n't been for sid .
confound it !
sometimes she sews it with white , and sometimes she sews it with black .
i wish to gee-miny she 'd stick to one or t'other .
i ca n't keep the run of 'em .
but i bet you i 'll lam sid for that .
i 'll learn him ! ''
he was not the model boy of the village .
he knew the model boy very well though .
and loathed him .
within two minutes , or even less , he had forgotten all his troubles .
not because his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter
to him than a man 's are to a man .
but because a new and powerful interest bore them down and drove them out of his mind for the time .
just as men's misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of new enterprises .
this new interest was a valued novelty in whistling .
which he had just acquired from a negro , and he was suffering to practise it un-disturbed .
it consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn .
a sort of liquid warble .
produced by touching the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short intervals in the midst of the music .
the reader probably remembers how to do it , if he has ever been a boy .
diligence and attention soon gave him the knack of it .
and he strode down the street with his mouth full of harmony and his soul full of gratitude .
he felt much as an astronomer feels who has discovered a new planet .
no doubt .
as far as strong .
deep , unalloyed pleasure is concerned , the advantage was with the boy , not the astronomer .
the summer evenings were long .
it was not dark , yet .
presently tom checked his whistle .
a stranger was before him .
a boy a shade larger than himself .
a new-comer of any age or either sex was an im-pressive
curiosity in the poor little shabby village of st. petersburg .
this boy was well dressed , too .
well dressed on a week-day .
this was simply as astounding .
his cap was a dainty thing .
his close-buttoned blue cloth roundabout was new and natty , and so were his pantaloons .
he had shoes on .
and it was only friday .
he even wore a necktie , a bright bit of ribbon .
he had a citified air about him that ate into tom 's vitals .
the more tom stared at the splendid marvel .
the higher he turned up his nose at his finery and the
shabbier and shabbier his own outfit seemed to him to grow .
neither boy spoke .
if one moved , the other moved .
but only sidewise , in a circle .
they kept face to face and eye to eye all the time .
finally tom said : `` i can lick you ! ''
`` i 'd like to see you try it . ''
`` well , i can do it . ''
`` no you ca n't , either . ''
`` yes i can . ''
`` no you ca n't . ''
`` i can . ''
`` you ca n't . ''
`` can ! ''
`` ca n't ! ''
an uncomfortable pause .
then tom said : `` what 's your name ? ''
`` 't is n't any of your business , maybe . ''
`` well i 'low i 'll make it my business . ''
`` well why do n't you ? ''
`` if you say much , i will . ''
`` much .
much .
much .
there now . ''
`` oh , you think you 're mighty smart , do n't you ?
i could lick you with one hand tied behind me , if i wanted to . ''
`` well why do n't you do it ?
you say you can do it . ''
`` well i will , if you fool with me . ''
`` oh yes .
i 've seen whole families in the same fix . ''
`` smarty !
you think you 're some , now , do n't you ?
oh , what a hat ! ''
`` you can lump that hat if you do n't like it .
i dare you to knock it off .
and anybody that 'll take a dare will suck eggs . ''
`` you 're a liar ! ''
`` you 're another . ''
`` you 're a fighting liar and das n't take it up . ''
`` aw .
take a walk ! ''
`` say .
if you give me much more of your sass i 'll
take and bounce a rock off ' n your head . ''
`` oh , of course you will . ''
`` well i will . ''
`` well why do n't you do it then ?
what do you keep saying you will for ?
why do n't you do it ?
it 's because you 're afraid . ''
`` i ai n't afraid . ''
`` you are . ''
`` i ai n't . ''
`` you are . ''
another pause , and more eying and sidling around each other .
presently they were shoulder to shoulder .
tom said : `` get away from here ! ''
`` go away yourself ! ''
`` i wo n't . ''
`` i wo n't either . ''
so they stood .
each with a foot placed at an angle as a brace .
and both shoving with might and main , and glowering at each other with hate .
but neither could get an advantage .
after struggling till both were hot and flushed .
each relaxed his strain with watchful caution , and tom said : `` you 're a coward and a pup .
i 'll tell my big brother on you .
and he can thrash you with his little finger , and i 'll make him do it , too . ''
`` what do i care for your big brother ?
i 've got a brother that 's bigger than he is .
and what 's more , he can throw him over that fence , too . ''
[ both brothers were imaginary . ]
`` that 's a lie . ''
`` your saying so do n't make it so . ''
tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe .
and said : `` i dare you to step over that .
and i 'll lick you till you ca n't stand up .
anybody that 'll take a dare will steal sheep . ''
the new boy stepped over promptly .
and said : `` now you said you 'd do it , now let 's see you do it . ''
`` do n't you crowd me now .
you better look out . ''
`` well , you said you 'd do it .
why do n't you do it ? ''
`` by jingo !
for two cents i will do it . ''
the new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket and held them out with derision .
tom struck them to the ground .
in an instant both boys were rolling and tumbling in the dirt , gripped together like cats .
and for the space of a minute they tugged and tore at each other 's hair and clothes .
punched and scratched each other 's nose , and covered themselves with dust and glory .
presently the confusion took form .
and through the fog of battle tom appeared .
seated astride the new boy , and pounding him with his fists .
`` holler 'nuff ! ''
said he .
the boy only struggled to free himself .
he was crying .
mainly from rage .
`` holler 'nuff ! `` .
and the pounding went on .
at last the stranger got out a smothered `` 'nuff ! ''
and tom let him up and said : `` now that 'll learn you .
better look out who you 're fooling with next time . ''
the new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes .
sobbing .
snuffling .
and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and threatening what he would
do to tom the `` next time he caught him out . ''
to which tom responded with jeers .
and started off in high feather .
and as soon as his back was turned the new boy snatched up a stone .
threw it and hit him between the shoulders and then turned tail and ran like an antelope .
tom chased the traitor home , and thus found out where he lived .
he then held a position at the gate for some time .
daring the enemy to come outside , but the enemy only made faces at him through the window and declined .
at last the enemy 's mother appeared .
and called tom a bad , vicious , vulgar child , and ordered him away .
so he went away .
but he said he `` 'lowed '' to `` lay '' for that boy .
he got home pretty late that night .
and when he climbed cautiously in at the window .
he uncovered an ambuscade , in the person of his aunt .
and when she saw the state his clothes were in her resolution to turn
his saturday holiday into captivity at hard labor became adamantine in its firmness .
saturday morning was come , and all the summer world was bright and fresh , and brimming with life .
there was a song in every heart .
and if the heart was young the music issued at the lips .
there was cheer in every face and a spring in every step .
the locust-trees were in bloom and the fragrance of the blossoms filled the air .
cardiff hill .
beyond the village and above it .
was green with vegetation and it lay just far enough away to seem a delectable land .
dreamy , reposeful , and inviting .
tom appeared on the sidewalk with a bucket of whitewash and a long-handled brush .
he surveyed the fence , and all gladness left him and a deep melancholy settled down upon his spirit .
thirty yards of board fence nine feet high .
life to him seemed hollow , and existence but a burden .
sighing , he dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost plank .
repeated the operation .
did it again .
compared the insignificant whitewashed streak with the far-reaching continent of unwhitewashed fence , and sat down on a tree-box discouraged .
jim came skipping out at the gate with a tin pail , and singing buffalo gals .
bringing water from the town pump had always been hateful work in tom 's eyes .
before , but now it did not strike him so .
he remembered that there was company at the pump .
white , mulatto .
and negro boys and girls were always there waiting their turns .
resting , trading playthings , quarrelling , fighting , skylarking .
and he remembered that although the pump was only a hundred and fifty yards off .
jim never got back with a bucket of water under an hour .
and even then somebody generally had to go after him .
tom said : `` say , jim , i 'll fetch the water if you 'll whitewash some . ''
jim shook his head and said : `` ca n't , mars tom .
ole missis .
she tole me i got to go an ' git dis
water an ' not stop foolin ' roun ' wid anybody .
she say she spec ' mars tom gwine to ax me to whitewash .
an ' so she tole me go 'long an ' 'tend to my own business .
she 'lowed she 'd 'tend to de whitewashin ' . ''
`` oh , never you mind what she said , jim .
that 's the way she always talks .
gim me the bucket .
i wo n't be gone only a a minute .
she wo n't ever know . ''
`` oh , i das n't , mars tom .
ole missis she 'd take an ' tar de head off ' n me .
'deed she would . ''
`` she !
she never licks anybody .
whacks 'em over the head with her thimble .
and who cares for that , i 'd like to know .
she talks awful , but talk do n't hurt .
anyways it do n't if she do n't cry .
jim , i 'll give you a marvel .
i 'll give you a white alley ! ''
jim began to waver .
`` white alley , jim !
and it 's a bully taw . ''
`` my !
dat 's a mighty gay marvel , i tell you !
but mars tom i 's powerful 'fraid ole missis. ``
`` and besides , if you will i 'll show you my sore toe . ''
jim was only human .
this attraction was too much for him .
he put down his pail .
took the white alley , and bent over the toe with absorbing interest while the bandage was being unwound .
in another moment he was flying down the street with his pail and a tingling rear .
tom was whitewashing with vigor .
and aunt polly was retiring from the field with a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye .
but tom 's energy did not last .
he began to think of the fun he had planned for this day , and his sorrows multiplied .
soon the free boys would come tripping along on all sorts of delicious expeditions .
and they would make a world of fun of him for having to work .
the very thought of it burnt him like fire .
he got out his worldly wealth and examined it .
bits of toys , marbles , and trash .
enough to buy an exchange of work .
maybe , but not half enough to buy so much as half an hour of pure freedom .
so he returned his straitened means to his pocket .
and gave up the idea of trying to buy the boys .
at this dark and hopeless moment an inspiration burst upon him !
nothing less than a great , magnificent inspiration .
he took up his brush and went tranquilly to work .
ben rogers hove in sight presently .
the very boy , of all boys , whose ridicule he had been dreading .
ben 's gait was the hop-skip-and-jump .
proof enough that his heart was light and his anticipations high .
he was eating an apple .
and giving a long .
melodious whoop , at intervals , followed by a deep-toned ding-dong-dong , ding-dong-dong , for he was personating a steamboat .
as he drew near .
he slackened speed .
took the middle of the street .
leaned far over to starboard and rounded to ponderously and with laborious pomp and circumstance .
for he was personating the big missouri , and considered himself to be drawing nine feet of water .
he was boat and captain and engine-bells combined .
so he had to imagine himself standing on his own hurricane-deck
giving the orders and executing them : `` stop her .
sir !
ting-a-ling-ling ! ''
the headway ran almost out , and he drew up slowly toward the sidewalk .
`` ship up to back !
ting-a-ling-ling ! ''
his arms straightened and stiffened down his sides .
`` set her back on the stabboard !
ting-a-ling-ling !
chow !
ch-chow-wow !
chow ! ''
his right hand , mean-time , describing stately circles .
for it was representing a forty-foot wheel .
`` let her go back on the labboard !
ting-a-ling-ling !
chow-ch-chow-chow ! ''
the left hand began to describe circles .
`` stop the stabboard !
ting-a-ling-ling !
stop the labboard !
come ahead on the stabboard !
stop her !
let your outside turn over slow !
ting-a-ling-ling !
chow-ow-ow !
get out that head-line !
lively now !
come .
out with your spring-line .
what 're you about there !
take a turn round that stump with the bight of it !
stand by that stage , now .
let her go !
done with the engines , sir !
ting-a-ling-ling !
sh't !
s ' h't !
sh't ! ''
( trying the gauge-cocks ) .
tom went on whitewashing .
paid no attention to the steamboat .
ben stared a moment and then said : `` hi-yi !
you 're up a stump , ai n't you ! ''
no answer .
tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of an artist .
then he gave his brush another gentle sweep and surveyed the result , as before .
ben ranged up alongside of him .
tom 's mouth watered for the apple , but he stuck to his work .
ben said : `` hello , old chap , you got to work , hey ? ''
tom wheeled suddenly and said : `` why , it 's you , ben !
i war n't noticing . ''
`` say .
i 'm going in a-swimming , i am .
do n't you wish you could ?
but of course you 'd druther work .
would n't you ?
course you would ! ''
tom contemplated the boy a bit , and said : `` what do you call work ? ''
`` why , ai n't that work ? ''
tom resumed his whitewashing .
and answered carelessly : `` well , maybe it is , and maybe it ai n't .
all i know , is , it suits tom sawyer . ''
`` oh come , now , you do n't mean to let on that you like it ? ''
the brush continued to move .
`` like it ?
well , i do n't see why i ought n't to like it .
does a boy get a chance to whitewash a fence every day ? ''
that put the thing in a new light .
ben stopped nibbling his apple .
tom swept his brush daintily back and forth .
stepped back to note the effect .
added a touch here and there .
criticised the effect again .
ben watching every move and getting more and more interested , more and more absorbed .
presently he said : `` say , tom , let me whitewash a little . ''
tom considered , was about to consent .
but he altered his mind : `` no .
no .
i reckon it would n't hardly do , ben .
you see , aunt polly 's awful particular about this fence .
right here on the street , you know .
but if it was the back fence i would n't mind and she would n't .
yes , she 's awful particular about this fence .
it 's got to be done very careful .
i reckon there ai n't one boy in a thousand .
maybe two thousand , that can do it the way it 's got to be done . ''
`` no .
is that so ?
oh come , now .
lem me just try .
only just a little .
i 'd let you , if you was me , tom . ''
`` ben , i 'd like to , honest injun .
but aunt polly .
well , jim wanted to do it , but she would n't let him .
sid wanted to do it , and she would n't let sid .
now do n't you see how i 'm fixed ?
if you was to tackle this fence and anything was to happen to it. ``
`` oh , shucks , i 'll be just as careful .
now lem me try .
say .
i 'll give you the core of my apple . ''
`` well , here .
no , ben , now do n't .
i 'm afeard. ``
`` i 'll give you all of it ! ''
tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face , but alacrity in his heart .
and while the late steamer big missouri worked and sweated in the sun .
the retired artist sat on a barrel in the shade close by .
dangled his legs , munched his apple , and planned the slaughter of more innocents .
there was no lack of material .
boys happened along every little while .
they came to jeer , but remained to whitewash .
by the time ben was fagged out .
tom had traded the next chance to billy fisher for a kite , in good repair .
and when he played out .
johnny miller bought in for a dead rat and a string to swing it with .
and so on , and so on , hour after hour .
and when the middle of the afternoon came .
from being a poor poverty-stricken boy in the morning , tom was literally rolling in wealth .
he had besides the things before mentioned .
twelve marbles , part of a jews-harp .
a piece of blue bottle-glass to look through .
a spool cannon .
a key that would n't unlock anything .
a fragment of chalk .
a glass stopper of a decanter .
a tin soldier .
a couple of tadpoles .
six fire-crackers , a kitten with only one eye , a brass door-knob , a dog-collar .
but no dog .
the handle of a knife , four pieces of orange-peel , and a dilapidated old window sash .
he had had a nice , good , idle time all the while .
plenty of company .
and the fence had three coats of whitewash on it !
if he had n't run out of whitewash he would have bankrupted every boy in the village .
tom said to himself that it was not such a hollow world , after all .
he had discovered a great law of human action , without knowing it .
namely .
that in order to make a man or a boy covet a thing .
it is only necessary to make the thing difficult to attain .
if he had been a great and wise philosopher .
like the writer of this book .
he would now have comprehended that work consists of whatever a body is obliged to do .
and that play consists of whatever a body is not obliged to do .
and this would help him to understand why constructing artificial flowers or performing on a tread-mill is work .
while rolling ten-pins or climbing mont blanc is only amusement .
there are wealthy gentlemen in england who drive four-horse passenger-coaches twenty or thirty miles on a daily line .
in the summer , because the privilege costs them considerable money .
but if they were offered wages for the service .
that would turn it into work and then they would resign .
the boy mused awhile over the substantial change which had taken place in his worldly circumstances .
and then wended toward headquarters to report .
tom presented himself before aunt polly .
who was sitting by an open window in a pleasant rearward apartment .
which was bedroom , breakfast-room , dining-room , and library , combined .
the balmy summer air .
the restful quiet .
the odor of the flowers .
and the drowsing murmur of the bees had had their effect , and she was nodding over her knitting .
for she had no company but the cat , and it was asleep in her lap .
her spectacles were propped up on her gray head for safety .
she had thought that of course tom had deserted long ago .
and she wondered at seeing him place himself in her power again in this intrepid way .
he said : `` may n't i go and play now , aunt ? ''
`` what , a'ready ?
how much have you done ? ''
`` it 's all done , aunt . ''
`` tom , do n't lie to me .
i ca n't bear it . ''
`` i ai n't , aunt .
it is all done . ''
aunt polly placed small trust in such evidence .
she went out to see for herself .
and she would have been content to find twenty per cent .
of tom 's statement true .
when she found the entire fence white-washed .
and not only whitewashed but elaborately coated and recoated .
and even a streak added to the ground , her astonishment was almost unspeakable .
she said : `` well , i never !
there 's no getting round it , you can work when you 're a mind to , tom . ''
and then she diluted the compliment by adding .
`` but it's powerful seldom you 're a mind to , i 'm bound to say .
well , go 'long and play .
but mind you get back some time in a week , or i 'll tan you . ''
she was so overcome by the splendor of his achievement that she took him
into the closet and selected a choice apple and delivered it to him .
along with an improving lecture upon the added value and flavor a
treat took to itself when it came without sin through virtuous effort .
and while she closed with a happy scriptural flourish , he `` hooked '' a doughnut .
then he skipped out .
and saw sid just starting up the outside stairway that led to the back rooms on the second floor .
clods were handy and the air was full of them in a twinkling .
they raged around sid like a hail-storm .
and before aunt polly could collect her surprised faculties and sally to the rescue .
six or seven clods had taken personal effect , and tom was over the fence and gone .
there was a gate .
but as a general thing he was too crowded for time to make use of it .
his soul was at peace .
now that he had settled with sid for calling attention to his black thread and getting him into trouble .
tom skirted the block .
and came round into a muddy alley that led by the back of his aunt 's cow-stable .
he presently got safely beyond the reach of capture and punishment .
and hastened toward the public square of the village .
where two `` military '' companies of boys had met for conflict , according to previous appointment .
tom was general of one of these armies , joe harper ( a bosom friend ) general of the other .
these two great commanders did not condescend to fight in person .
that being better suited to the still smaller fry .
but sat together on an eminence and conducted the field operations by orders delivered through aides-de-camp .
tom 's army won a great victory , after a long and hard-fought battle .
then the dead were counted .
prisoners exchanged , the terms of the next disagreement agreed upon , and the day for the necessary battle appointed .
after which the armies fell into line and marched away , and tom turned homeward alone .
as he was passing by the house where jeff thatcher lived , he saw a new girl in the garden .
a lovely little blue-eyed creature with yellow hair plaited into two long-tails , white summer frock and embroidered pan-talettes .
the fresh-crowned hero fell without firing a shot .
a certain amy lawrence vanished out of his heart and left not even a memory of herself behind .
he had thought he loved her to distraction .
he had regarded his passion as adoration .
and behold it was only a poor little evanescent partiality .
he had been months winning her .
she had confessed hardly a week ago .
he had been the happiest and the proudest boy in the world only seven short days .
and here in one instant of time she had gone out
of his heart like a casual stranger whose visit is done .
he worshipped this new angel with furtive eye , till he saw that she had discovered him .
then he pretended he did not know she was present .
and began to `` show off '' in all sorts of absurd boyish ways .
in order to win her admiration .
he kept up this grotesque foolishness for some time .
but by-and-by .
while he was in the midst of some dangerous gymnastic performances .
he glanced aside and saw that the little girl was wending her way toward the house .
tom came up to the fence and leaned on it .
grieving , and hoping she would tarry yet awhile longer .
she halted a moment on the steps and then moved toward the door .
tom heaved a great sigh as she put her foot on the threshold .
but his face lit up .
right away , for she tossed a pansy over the fence a moment before she disappeared .
the boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two of the flower .
and then shaded his eyes with his hand and began to look down street
as if he had discovered something of interest going on in that direction .
presently he picked up a straw and began trying to balance it on his nose .
with his head tilted far back .
and as he moved from side to side .
in his efforts , he edged nearer and nearer toward the pansy .
finally his bare foot rested upon it .
his pliant toes closed upon it , and he hopped away with the treasure and disappeared round the corner .
but only for a minute .
only while he could button the flower inside his jacket , next his heart .
or next his stomach .
possibly , for he was not much posted in anatomy , and not hypercritical , anyway .
he returned , now , and hung about the fence till nightfall , `` showing off , '' as before .
but the girl never exhibited herself again .
though tom comforted himself a little with the hope that she had been near some window .
meantime , and been aware of his attentions .
finally he strode home reluctantly , with his poor head full of visions .
all through supper his spirits were so high that his aunt wondered `` what had got into the child . ''
he took a good scolding about clodding sid , and did not seem to mind it in the least .
he tried to steal sugar under his aunt 's very nose , and got his knuckles rapped for it .
he said : `` aunt , you do n't whack sid when he takes it . ''
`` well , sid do n't torment a body the way you do .
you 'd be always into that sugar if i war n't watching you . ''
presently she stepped into the kitchen , and sid , happy in his immunity , reached for the sugar-bowl .
a sort of glorying over tom which was wellnigh unbearable .
but sid 's fingers slipped and the bowl dropped and broke .
tom was in ecstasies .
in such ecstasies that he even controlled his tongue and was silent .
he said to himself that he would not speak a word .
even when his aunt came in , but would sit perfectly still till she asked who did the mischief .
and then he would tell .
and there would be nothing so good in the world as to see that pet model `` catch it . ''
he was so brimful of exultation that he could hardly hold himself when the old lady
came back and stood above the wreck discharging lightnings of wrath from over her spectacles .
he said to himself , `` now it 's coming ! ''
and the next instant he was sprawling on the floor !
the potent palm was uplifted to strike again when tom cried out : `` hold on .
now , what 'er you belting me for ? .
sid broke it ! ''
aunt polly paused , perplexed , and tom looked for healing pity .
but when she got her tongue again , she only said : `` umf !
well , you did n't get a lick amiss , i reckon .
you been into some other audacious mischief when i was n't around , like enough . ''
then her conscience reproached her , and she yearned to say something kind and loving .
but she judged that this would be construed into a confession that she had been in the wrong .
and discipline forbade that .
so she kept silence , and went about her affairs with a troubled heart .
tom sulked in a corner and exalted his woes .
he knew that in her heart his aunt was on her knees to him .
and he was morosely gratified by the consciousness of it .
he would hang out no signals , he would take notice of none .
he knew that a yearning glance fell upon him .
now and then , through a film of tears , but he refused recognition of it .
he pictured himself lying sick unto death and his aunt bending over him beseeching one little forgiving word .
but he would turn his face to the wall , and die with that word unsaid .
ah , how would she feel then ?
and he pictured himself brought home from the river .
dead , with his curls all wet , and his sore heart at rest .
how she would throw herself upon him .
and how her tears would fall like rain .
and her lips pray god to give her back her boy and she would never .
never abuse him any more !
but he would lie there cold and white and make no sign .
a poor little sufferer , whose griefs were at an end .
he so worked upon his feelings with the pathos of these dreams .
that he had to keep swallowing , he was so like to choke .
and his eyes swam in a blur of water .
which overflowed when he winked , and ran down and trickled from the end of his nose .
and such a luxury to him was this petting of his sorrows .
that he could not bear to have any worldly cheeriness or any grating delight intrude upon it .
it was too sacred for such contact .
and so .
presently .
when his cousin mary danced in .
all alive with the joy of seeing home again after an age-long visit of one week to the country .
he got up and moved in clouds and darkness out at one
door as she brought song and sunshine in at the other .
he wandered far from the accustomed haunts of boys .
and sought desolate places that were in harmony with his spirit .
a log raft in the river invited him .
and he seated himself on its outer edge and contemplated the dreary vastness of the stream .
wishing .
the while .
that he could only be drowned .
all at once and unconsciously , without undergoing the uncomfortable routine devised by nature .
then he thought of his flower .
he got it out , rumpled and wilted , and it mightily increased his dismal felicity .
he wondered if she would pity him if she knew ?
would she cry .
and wish that she had a right to put her arms around his neck and comfort him ?
or would she turn coldly away like all the hollow world ?
this picture brought such an agony of pleasurable suffering that he worked it over and
over again in his mind and set it up in new and varied lights .
till he wore it threadbare .
at last he rose up sighing and departed in the darkness .
about half-past nine or ten o'clock he came along the deserted street to where the adored unknown lived .
he paused a moment .
no sound fell upon his listening ear .
a candle was casting a dull glow upon the curtain of a second-story window .
was the sacred presence there ?
he climbed the fence , threaded his stealthy way through the plants , till he stood under that window .
he looked up at it long , and with emotion .
then he laid him down on the ground under it .
disposing himself upon his back , with his hands clasped upon his breast and holding his poor wilted flower .
and thus he would die .
out in the cold world .
with no shelter over his homeless head .
no friendly hand to wipe the death-damps from his brow .
no loving face to bend pityingly over him when the great agony came .
and thus she would see him when she looked out upon the glad morning , and oh !
would she drop one little tear upon his poor .
lifeless form .
would she heave one little sigh to see a bright young life so rudely blighted , so untimely cut down ?
the window went up .
a maid-servant 's discordant voice profaned the holy calm .
and a deluge of water drenched the prone martyr 's remains !
the strangling hero sprang up with a relieving snort .
there was a whiz as of a missile in the air .
mingled with the murmur of a curse .
a sound as of shivering glass followed .
and a small , vague form went over the fence and shot away in the gloom .
not long after .
as tom .
all undressed for bed .
was surveying his drenched garments by the light of a tallow dip , sid woke up .
but if he had any dim idea of making any `` references to allusions .
'' he thought better of it and held his peace , for there was danger in tom 's eye .
tom turned in without the added vexation of prayers , and sid made mental note of the omission .
the sun rose upon a tranquil world , and beamed down upon the peaceful village like a benediction .
breakfast over .
aunt polly had family worship : it began with a prayer
built from the ground up of solid courses of scriptural quotations .
welded together with a thin mortar of originality .
and from the summit of this she delivered a grim the mosaic law , as from sinai .
then tom girded up his loins .
so to speak , and went to work to `` get his verses . ''
sid had learned his lesson days before .
tom bent all his energies to the memorizing of five verses .
and he chose part of the sermon on the mount , because he could find no verses that were shorter .
at the end of half an hour tom had a vague general idea of his lesson .
but no more .
for his mind was traversing the whole field of human thought , and his hands were busy with distracting recreations .
mary took his book to hear him recite .
and he tried to find his way through the fog : `` blessed are the .
a. a. ``
`` poor '' .
`` yes .
poor .
blessed are the poor .
a. a. ``
`` in spirit. ``
`` in spirit .
blessed are the poor in spirit , for they .
they. ``
`` theirs. ``
`` for theirs .
blessed are the poor in spirit , for theirs is the kingdom of heaven .
blessed are they that mourn , for they .
they. ``
`` sh. ``
`` for they .
a. ``
`` s , h , a. ``
`` for they s , h. oh , i do n't know what it is ! ''
`` shall ! ''
`` oh , shall !
for they shall .
for they shall .
a. a. shall mourn .
a. a. blessed are they that shall .
they that .
a. they that shall mourn , for they shall .
a. shall what ?
why do n't you tell me , mary ? .
what do you want to be so mean for ? ''
`` oh , tom , you poor thick-headed thing , i 'm not teasing you .
i wouldn't do that .
you must go and learn it again .
do n't you be discouraged , tom , you 'll manage it .
and if you do , i 'll give you something ever so nice .
there , now , that 's a good boy . ''
`` all right !
what is it , mary , tell me what it is . ''
`` never you mind , tom .
you know if i say it 's nice , it is nice . ''
`` you bet you that 's so , mary .
all right , i 'll tackle it again . ''
and he did `` tackle it again '' .
and under the double pressure of curiosity and prospective gain he
did it with such spirit that he accomplished a shining success .
mary gave him a brand-new `` barlow '' knife worth twelve and a half cents .
and the convulsion of delight that swept his system shook him to his foundations .
true .
the knife would not cut anything .
but it was a `` sure-enough '' barlow , and there was inconceivable grandeur in that .
though where the western boys ever got the idea that such a weapon could possibly
be counterfeited to its injury is an imposing mystery and will always remain so .
perhaps .
tom contrived to scarify the cupboard with it .
and was arranging to begin on the bureau , when he was called off to dress for sunday-school .
mary gave him a tin basin of water and a piece of soap .
and he went outside the door and set the basin on a little bench there .
then he dipped the soap in the water and laid it down .
turned up his sleeves .
poured out the water on the ground .
gently , and then entered the kitchen and began to wipe his face diligently on the towel behind the door .
but mary removed the towel and said : `` now ai n't you ashamed , tom .
you must n't be so bad .
water wo n't hurt you . ''
tom was a trifle disconcerted .
the basin was refilled , and this time he stood over it a little while , gathering resolution .
took in a big breath and began .
when he entered the kitchen presently .
with both eyes shut and groping for the towel with his hands .
an honorable testimony of suds and water was dripping from his face .
but when he emerged from the towel .
he was not yet satisfactory .
for the clean territory stopped short at his chin and his jaws , like a mask .
below and beyond this line there was a dark expanse of unirrigated
soil that spread downward in front and backward around his neck .
mary took him in hand .
and when she was done with him he was a man and a brother .
without distinction of color .
and his saturated hair was neatly brushed , and its short curls wrought into a dainty and symmetrical general effect .
[ he privately smoothed out the curls .
with labor and difficulty , and plastered his hair close down to his head .
for he held curls to be effeminate , and his own filled his life with bitterness . ]
then mary got out a suit of his clothing that had been used only on sundays during two years .
they were simply called his `` other clothes '' .
and so by that we know the size of his wardrobe .
the girl `` put him to rights '' after he had dressed himself .
she buttoned his neat roundabout up to his chin .
turned his vast shirt collar down over his shoulders .
brushed him off and crowned him with his speckled straw hat .
he now looked exceedingly improved and uncomfortable .
he was fully as uncomfortable as he looked .
for there was a restraint about whole clothes and cleanliness that galled him .
he hoped that mary would forget his shoes , but the hope was blighted .
she coated them thoroughly with tallow , as was the custom , and brought them out .
he lost his temper and said he was always being made to do everything he did n't want to do .
but mary said , persuasively : `` please , tom .
that 's a good boy . ''
so he got into the shoes snarling .
mary was soon ready , and the three children set out for sunday-school .
a place that tom hated with his whole heart .
but sid and mary were fond of it .
sabbath-school hours were from nine to half-past ten .
and then church service .
two of the children always remained for the sermon voluntarily , and the other always remained too .
for stronger reasons .
the church's high-backed , uncushioned pews would seat about three hundred persons .
the edifice was but a small .
plain affair , with a sort of pine board tree-box on top of it for a steeple .
at the door tom dropped back a step and accosted a sunday-dressed comrade : `` say .
billy , got a yaller ticket ? ''
`` yes . ''
`` what 'll you take for her ? ''
`` what 'll you give ? ''
`` piece of lickrish and a fish-hook . ''
`` less see 'em . ''
tom exhibited .
they were satisfactory , and the property changed hands .
then tom traded a couple of white alleys for three red tickets .
and some small trifle or other for a couple of blue ones .
he waylaid other boys as they came .
and went on buying tickets of various colors ten or fifteen minutes longer .
he entered the church .
now .
with a swarm of clean and noisy boys and girls .
proceeded to his seat and started a quarrel with the first boy that came handy .
the teacher , a grave , elderly man , interfered .
then turned his back a moment and tom pulled a boy 's hair in the next bench .
and was absorbed in his book when the boy turned around .
stuck a pin in another boy , presently , in order to hear him say `` ouch ! ''
and got a new reprimand from his teacher .
tom 's whole class were of a pattern .
restless , noisy , and troublesome .
when they came to recite their lessons .
not one of them knew his verses perfectly , but had to be prompted all along .
however , they worried through , and each got his reward .
in small blue tickets , each with a passage of scripture on it .
each blue ticket was pay for two verses of the recitation .
ten blue tickets equalled a red one , and could be exchanged for it .
ten red tickets equalled a yellow one .
for ten yellow tickets the superintendent gave a very plainly bound bible
( worth forty cents in those easy times ) to the pupil .
how many of my readers would have the industry and application to memorize two thousand verses .
even for a dore bible ?
and yet mary had acquired two bibles in this way .
it was the patient work of two years .
and a boy of german parentage had won four or five .
he once recited three thousand verses without stopping .
but the strain upon his mental faculties was too great .
and he was little better than an idiot from that day forth .
a grievous misfortune for the school .
for on great occasions .
before company .
the superintendent ( as tom expressed it ) had always made this boy come out and `` spread himself . ''
only the older pupils managed to keep their tickets and stick
to their tedious work long enough to get a bible .
and so the delivery of one of these prizes was a rare and noteworthy circumstance .
the successful pupil was so great and conspicuous for that day that on the spot every
scholar's heart was fired with a fresh ambition that often lasted a couple of weeks .
it is possible that tom 's mental stomach had never really hungered for one of those prizes .
but unquestionably his entire being had for many a day longed
for the glory and the eclat that came with it .
in due course the superintendent stood up in front of the pulpit .
with a closed hymn-book in his hand and his forefinger inserted between its leaves , and commanded attention .
when a sunday-school superintendent makes his customary little speech .
a hymn-book in the hand is as necessary as is the inevitable sheet of music in the
hand of a singer who stands forward on the platform and sings a solo at a concert .
though why .
is a mystery : for neither the hymn-book nor the sheet of music is ever referred to by the sufferer .
this superintendent was a slim creature of thirty-five , with a sandy goatee and short sandy hair .
he wore a stiff standing-collar whose upper edge almost reached his ears
and whose sharp points curved forward abreast the corners of his mouth .
a fence that compelled a straight lookout ahead .
and a turning of the whole body when a side view was required .
his chin was propped on a spreading cravat which was as broad and as long as a bank-note .
and had fringed ends .
his boot toes were turned sharply up , in the fashion of the day , like sleigh-runners .
an effect patiently and laboriously produced by the young men by
sitting with their toes pressed against a wall for hours together .
mr. walters was very earnest of mien , and very sincere and honest at heart .
and he held sacred things and places in such reverence .
and so separated them from worldly matters .
that unconsciously to himself his sunday-school voice had acquired a peculiar intonation which was wholly absent on week-days .
he began after this fashion : `` now .
children .
i want you all to sit up just as straight and pretty as
you can and give me all your attention for a minute or two .
there .
that is it .
that is the way good little boys and girls should do .
i see one little girl who is looking out of the window .
i am afraid she thinks i am out there somewhere .
perhaps up in one of the trees making a speech to the little birds .
[ applausive titter . ]
i want to tell you how good it makes me feel to see so many bright .
clean little faces assembled in a place like this , learning to do right and be good . ''
and so forth and so on .
it is not necessary to set down the rest of the oration .
it was of a pattern which does not vary , and so it is familiar to us all .
the latter third of the speech was marred by the resumption
of fights and other recreations among certain of the bad boys .
and by fidgetings and whisperings that extended far and wide .
washing even to the bases of isolated and incorruptible rocks like sid and mary .
but now every sound ceased suddenly .
with the subsidence of mr. walters ' voice .
and the conclusion of the speech was received with a burst of silent gratitude .
a good part of the whispering had been occasioned by an event which was more or less rare .
the entrance of visitors : lawyer thatcher , accompanied by a very feeble and aged man .
a fine , portly , middle-aged gentleman with iron-gray hair .
and a dignified lady who was doubtless the latter's wife .
the lady was leading a child .
tom had been restless and full of chafings and repinings .
conscience-smitten , too .
he could not meet amy lawrence 's eye , he could not brook her loving gaze .
but when he saw this small newcomer his soul was all ablaze with bliss in a moment .
the next moment he was `` showing off '' with all his might .
cuffing boys , pulling hair , making faces .
in a word , using every art that seemed likely to fascinate a girl and win her applause .
his exaltation had but one alloy .
the memory of his humiliation in this angel 's garden .
and that record in sand was fast washing out .
under the waves of happiness that were sweeping over it now .
the visitors were given the highest seat of honor .
and as soon as mr. walters ' speech was finished , he introduced them to the school .
the middle-aged man turned out to be a prodigious personage .
no less a one than the county judge .
altogether the most august creation these children had ever looked upon .
and they wondered what kind of material he was made of .
and they half wanted to hear him roar , and were half afraid he might , too .
he was from constantinople , twelve miles away .
so he had travelled , and seen the world .
these very eyes had looked upon the county court-house .
which was said to have a tin roof .
the awe which these reflections inspired was attested by the impressive silence and the ranks of staring eyes .
this was the great judge thatcher , brother of their own lawyer .
jeff thatcher immediately went forward , to be familiar with the great man and be envied by the school .
it would have been music to his soul to hear the whisperings : `` look at him , jim !
he 's a going up there .
say .
look !
he 's a going to shake hands with him .
he is shaking hands with him !
by jings , do n't you wish you was jeff ? ''
mr. walters fell to `` showing off .
'' with all sorts of official bustlings and activities .
giving orders , delivering judgments , discharging directions here , there , everywhere that he could find a target .
the librarian `` showed off '' .
running hither and thither with his arms full of books and making
a deal of the splutter and fuss that insect authority delights in .
the young lady teachers `` showed off '' .
bending sweetly over pupils that were lately being boxed .
lifting pretty warning fingers at bad little boys and patting good ones lovingly .
the young gentlemen teachers `` showed off '' with small scoldings
and other little displays of authority and fine attention to discipline .
and most of the teachers , of both sexes , found business up at the library , by the pulpit .
and it was business that frequently had to be done over
again two or three times ( with much seeming vexation ) .
the little girls `` showed off '' in various ways .
and the little boys `` showed off '' with such diligence that
the air was thick with paper wads and the murmur of scufflings .
and above it all the great man sat and beamed a majestic judicial smile upon all the house .
and warmed himself in the sun of his own grandeur .
for he was '' showing off , '' too .
there was only one thing wanting to make mr. walters ' ecstasy complete .
and that was a chance to deliver a bible-prize and exhibit a prodigy .
several pupils had a few yellow tickets , but none had enough .
he had been around among the star pupils inquiring .
he would have given worlds , now , to have that german lad back again with a sound mind .
and now at this moment .
when hope was dead .
tom sawyer came forward with nine yellow tickets .
nine red tickets , and ten blue ones , and demanded a bible .
this was a thunderbolt out of a clear sky .
walters was not expecting an application from this source for the next ten years .
but there was no getting around it .
here were the certified checks , and they were good for their face .
tom was therefore elevated to a place with the judge and the other elect .
and the great news was announced from headquarters .
it was the most stunning surprise of the decade .
and so profound was the sensation that it lifted the new hero up to the judicial one 's altitude .
and the school had two marvels to gaze upon in place of one .
the boys were all eaten up with envy .
but those that suffered the bitterest pangs were those who perceived too late that they themselves had contributed to
this hated splendor by trading tickets to tom for the wealth he had amassed in selling whitewashing privileges .
these despised themselves , as being the dupes of a wily fraud , a guileful snake in the grass .
the prize was delivered to tom with as much effusion as the superintendent could pump up under the circumstances .
but it lacked somewhat of the true gush .
for the poor fellow 's instinct taught him that there was
a mystery here that could not well bear the light .
perhaps .
it was simply preposterous that this boy had warehoused two thousand sheaves of scriptural wisdom on his premises .
a dozen would strain his capacity , without a doubt .
amy lawrence was proud and glad , and she tried to make tom see it in her face .
but he would n't look .
she wondered .
then she was just a grain troubled .
next a dim suspicion came and went .
came again .
she watched .
a furtive glance told her worlds .
and then her heart broke .
and she was jealous , and angry , and the tears came and she hated everybody .
tom most of all ( she thought ) .
tom was introduced to the judge .
but his tongue was tied , his breath would hardly come , his heart quaked .
partly because of the awful greatness of the man , but mainly because he was her parent .
he would have liked to fall down and worship him , if it were in the dark .
the judge put his hand on tom 's head and called him a fine little man .
and asked him what his name was .
the boy stammered , gasped , and got it out : `` tom . ''
`` oh , no , not tom .
it is. ``
`` thomas . ''
`` ah , that 's it .
i thought there was more to it , maybe .
that 's very well .
but you 've another one i daresay , and you 'll tell it to me , wo n't you ? ''
`` tell the gentleman your other name , thomas , '' said walters , `` and say sir .
you must n't forget your manners . ''
`` thomas sawyer .
sir . ''
`` that 's it !
that 's a good boy .
fine boy .
fine , manly little fellow .
two thousand verses is a great many .
very , very great many .
and you never can be sorry for the trouble you took to learn them .
for knowledge is worth more than anything there is in the world .
it 's what makes great men and good men .
you 'll be a great man and a good man yourself .
some day .
thomas .
and then you 'll look back and say .
it 's all owing to the precious sunday-school privileges of my boyhood .
it 's all owing to my dear teachers that taught me to learn .
it 's all owing to the good superintendent .
who encouraged me , and watched over me , and gave me a beautiful bible .
a splendid elegant bible .
to keep and have it all for my own , always .
it 's all owing to right bringing up !
that is what you will say , thomas .
and you would n't take any money for those two thousand verses .
no indeed you would n't .
and now you would n't mind telling me and this lady some of the things you 've learned .
no , i know you would n't .
for we are proud of little boys that learn .
now , no doubt you know the names of all the twelve disciples .
wo n't you tell us the names of the first two that were appointed ? ''
tom was tugging at a button-hole and looking sheepish .
he blushed , now , and his eyes fell .
mr. walters ' heart sank within him .
he said to himself , it is not possible that the boy can answer the simplest question .
why did the judge ask him ?
yet he felt obliged to speak up and say : `` answer the gentleman , thomas .
do n't be afraid . ''
tom still hung fire .
`` now i know you 'll tell me , '' said the lady .
`` the names of the first two disciples were. ``
`` david and goliah ! ''
let us draw the curtain of charity over the rest of the scene .
about half-past ten the cracked bell of the small church began to ring .
and presently the people began to gather for the morning sermon .
the sunday-school children distributed themselves about the house and occupied pews with their parents .
so as to be under supervision .
aunt polly came , and tom and sid and mary sat with her .
tom being placed next the aisle .
in order that he might be as far away from the
open window and the seductive outside summer scenes as possible .
the crowd filed up the aisles : the aged and needy postmaster , who had seen better days .
the mayor and his wife .
for they had a mayor there , among other unnecessaries .
the justice of the peace .
the widow douglass .
fair , smart .
and forty .
a generous .
good-hearted soul and well-to-do .
her hill mansion the only palace in the town .
and the most hospitable and much the most lavish in the matter of festivities that st. petersburg could boast .
the bent and venerable major and mrs. ward .
lawyer riverson , the new notable from a distance .
next the belle of the village , followed by a troop of lawn-clad and ribbon-decked young heart-breakers .
then all the young clerks in town in a body .
for they had stood in the vestibule sucking their cane-heads .
a circling wall of oiled and simpering admirers , till the last girl had run their gantlet .
and last of all came the model boy .
willie mufferson , taking as heedful care of his mother as if she were cut glass .
he always brought his mother to church , and was the pride of all the matrons .
the boys all hated him , he was so good .
and besides , he had been `` thrown up to them '' so much .
his white handkerchief was hanging out of his pocket behind , as usual on sundays .
accidentally .
tom had no handkerchief , and he looked upon boys who had as snobs .
the congregation being fully assembled .
now .
the bell rang once more .
to warn laggards and stragglers .
and then a solemn hush fell upon the church which was only
broken by the tittering and whispering of the choir in the gallery .
the choir always tittered and whispered all through service .
there was once a church choir that was not ill-bred , but i have forgotten where it was , now .
it was a great many years ago .
and i can scarcely remember anything about it , but i think it was in some foreign country .
the minister gave out the hymn .
and read it through with a relish .
in a peculiar style which was much admired in that part of the country .
his voice began on a medium key and climbed steadily up till it reached a certain point .
where it bore with strong emphasis upon the topmost word and then plunged down
as if from a spring-board : shall i be car-ri-ed toe the skies .
on flow'ry beds of ease , whilst others fight to win the prize , and sail thro ' blood-y seas ?
he was regarded as a wonderful reader .
at church `` sociables '' he was always called upon to read poetry .
and when he was through .
the ladies would lift up their hands and let them fall helplessly in their laps .
and `` wall '' their eyes .
and shake their heads , as much as to say , `` words can not express it .
it is too beautiful , too beautiful for this mortal earth . ''
after the hymn had been sung , the rev .
mr. sprague turned himself into a bulletin-board .
and read off `` notices '' of meetings and societies and things till
it seemed that the list would stretch out to the crack of doom .
a queer custom which is still kept up in america .
even in cities , away here in this age of abundant newspapers .
often .
the less there is to justify a traditional custom , the harder it is to get rid of it .
and now the minister prayed .
a good .
generous prayer it was .
and went into details : it pleaded for the church , and the little children of the church .
for the other churches of the village .
for the village itself .
for the county .
for the state .
for the state officers .
for the united states .
for the churches of the united states .
for congress .
for the president .
for the officers of the government .
for poor sailors , tossed by stormy seas .
for the oppressed millions groaning under the heel of european monarchies and oriental despotisms .
for such as have the light and the good tidings .
and yet have not eyes to see nor ears to hear withal .
for the heathen in the far islands of the sea .
and closed with a supplication that the words he was about to speak might find grace and favor .
and be as seed sown in fertile ground , yielding in time a grateful harvest of good .
amen .
there was a rustling of dresses , and the standing congregation sat down .
the boy whose history this book relates did not enjoy the prayer , he only endured it .
if he even did that much .
he was restive all through it .
he kept tally of the details of the prayer , unconsciously .
for he was not listening .
but he knew the ground of old , and the clergyman 's regular route over it .
and when a little trifle of new matter was interlarded .
his ear detected it and his whole nature resented it .
he considered additions unfair , and scoundrelly .
in the midst of the prayer a fly had lit on the back of the
pew in front of him and tortured his spirit by calmly rubbing its hands together .
embracing its head with its arms .
and polishing it so vigorously that it seemed to almost part company with the body .
and the slender thread of a neck was exposed to view .
scraping its wings with its hind legs and smoothing them to its body as if they had been coat-tails .
going through its whole toilet as tranquilly as if it knew it was perfectly safe .
as indeed it was .
for as sorely as tom's hands itched to grab for it they did not dare .
he believed his soul would be instantly destroyed if he did such a thing while the prayer was going on .
but with the closing sentence his hand began to curve and steal forward .
and the instant the `` amen '' was out the fly was a prisoner of war .
his aunt detected the act and made him let it go .
the minister gave out his text and droned along monotonously through an argument that
was so prosy that many a head by and by began to nod .
and yet it was an argument that dealt in limitless fire and brimstone and thinned the
predestined elect down to a company so small as to be hardly worth the saving .
tom counted the pages of the sermon .
after church he always knew how many pages there had been .
but he seldom knew anything else about the discourse .
however , this time he was really interested for a little while .
the minister made a grand and moving picture of the assembling together of the world 's hosts at the
millennium when the lion and the lamb should lie down together and a little child should lead them .
but the pathos , the lesson , the moral of the great spectacle were lost upon the boy .
he only thought of the conspicuousness of the principal character before the on-looking nations .
his face lit with the thought .
and he said to himself that he wished he could be that child , if it was a tame lion .
now he lapsed into suffering again , as the dry argument was resumed .
presently he bethought him of a treasure he had and got it out .
it was a large black beetle with formidable jaws .
a `` pinchbug , '' he called it .
it was in a percussion-cap box .
the first thing the beetle did was to take him by the finger .
a natural fillip followed .
the beetle went floundering into the aisle and lit on its back .
and the hurt finger went into the boy 's mouth .
the beetle lay there working its helpless legs , unable to turn over .
tom eyed it , and longed for it .
but it was safe out of his reach .
other people uninterested in the sermon found relief in the beetle , and they eyed it too .
presently a vagrant poodle dog came idling along .
sad at heart , lazy with the summer softness and the quiet , weary of captivity , sighing for change .
he spied the beetle .
the drooping tail lifted and wagged .
he surveyed the prize .
walked around it .
smelt at it from a safe distance .
walked around it again .
grew bolder , and took a closer smell .
then lifted his lip and made a gingerly snatch at it , just missing it .
made another , and another .
began to enjoy the diversion .
subsided to his stomach with the beetle between his paws , and continued his experiments .
grew weary at last , and then indifferent and absent-minded .
his head nodded , and little by little his chin descended and touched the enemy , who seized it .
there was a sharp yelp .
a flirt of the poodle 's head .
and the beetle fell a couple of yards away , and lit on its back once more .
the neighboring spectators shook with a gentle inward joy .
several faces went behind fans and hand-kerchiefs , and tom was entirely happy .
the dog looked foolish , and probably felt so .
but there was resentment in his heart , too , and a craving for revenge .
so he went to the beetle and began a wary attack on it again .
jumping at it from every point of a circle .
lighting with his fore-paws within an inch of the creature .
making even closer snatches at it with his teeth , and jerking his head till his ears flapped again .
but he grew tired once more , after a while .
tried to amuse himself with a fly but found no relief .
followed an ant around , with his nose close to the floor , and quickly wearied of that .
yawned , sighed , forgot the beetle entirely , and sat down on it .
then there was a wild yelp of agony and the poodle went sailing up the aisle .
the yelps continued , and so did the dog .
he crossed the house in front of the altar .
he flew down the other aisle .
he crossed before the doors .
he clamored up the home-stretch .
his anguish grew with his progress .
till presently he was but a woolly comet moving in its orbit with the gleam and the speed of light .
at last the frantic sufferer sheered from its course , and sprang into its master 's lap .
he flung it out of the window .
and the voice of distress quickly thinned away and died in the distance .
by this time the whole church was red-faced and suffocating with suppressed laughter .
and the sermon had come to a dead standstill .
the discourse was resumed presently .
but it went lame and halting , all possibility of impressiveness being at an end .
for even the gravest sentiments were constantly being received with a smothered burst of unholy mirth .
under cover of some remote pew-back , as if the poor parson had said a rarely facetious thing .
it was a genuine relief to the whole congregation when the ordeal was over and the benediction pronounced .
tom sawyer went home quite cheerful .
thinking to himself that there was some satisfaction about divine service when there was a bit of variety in it .
he had but one marring thought .
he was willing that the dog should play with his pinchbug .
but he did not think it was upright in him to carry it off .
monday morning found tom sawyer miserable .
monday morning always found him so .
because it began another week 's slow suffering in school .
he generally began that day with wishing he had had no intervening holiday .
it made the going into captivity and fetters again so much more odious .
tom lay thinking .
presently it occurred to him that he wished he was sick .
then he could stay home from school .
here was a vague possibility .
he canvassed his system .
no ailment was found , and he investigated again .
this time he thought he could detect colicky symptoms , and he began to encourage them with considerable hope .
but they soon grew feeble , and presently died wholly away .
he reflected further .
suddenly he discovered something .
one of his upper front teeth was loose .
this was lucky .
he was about to begin to groan .
as a `` starter .
'' as he called it .
when it occurred to him that if he came into court with that argument .
his aunt would pull it out , and that would hurt .
so he thought he would hold the tooth in reserve for the present , and seek further .
nothing offered for some little time .
and then he remembered hearing the doctor tell about a certain thing that laid up
a patient for two or three weeks and threatened to make him lose a finger .
so the boy eagerly drew his sore toe from under the sheet and held it up for inspection .
but now he did not know the necessary symptoms .
however , it seemed well worth while to chance it , so he fell to groaning with considerable spirit .
but sid slept on unconscious .
tom groaned louder , and fancied that he began to feel pain in the toe .
no result from sid .
tom was panting with his exertions by this time .
he took a rest and then swelled himself up and fetched a succession of admirable groans .
sid snored on .
tom was aggravated .
he said , `` sid , sid ! ''
and shook him .
this course worked well , and tom began to groan again .
sid yawned .
stretched , then brought himself up on his elbow with a snort , and began to stare at tom .
tom went on groaning .
sid said : `` tom !
say , tom ! ''
[ no response . ]
`` here , tom !
tom !
what is the matter , tom ? ''
and he shook him and looked in his face anxiously .
tom moaned out : `` oh , do n't , sid .
do n't joggle me . ''
`` why , what 's the matter , tom ?
i must call auntie . ''
`` no .
never mind .
it 'll be over by and by , maybe .
do n't call anybody . ''
`` but i must !
do n't groan so , tom , it 's awful .
how long you been this way ? ''
`` hours .
ouch !
oh , do n't stir so , sid , you 'll kill me . ''
`` tom , why did n't you wake me sooner ?
oh , tom , do n't !
it makes my flesh crawl to hear you .
tom , what is the matter ? ''
`` i forgive you everything , sid .
[ groan . ]
everything you 've ever done to me .
when i 'm gone. ``
`` oh , tom , you ai n't dying , are you ?
do n't , tom .
oh , do n't .
maybe. ``
`` i forgive everybody , sid .
[ groan . ]
tell 'em so , sid .
and sid .
you give my window-sash and my cat with one eye to that new girl that 's come to town .
and tell her. ``
but sid had snatched his clothes and gone .
tom was suffering in reality .
now , so handsomely was his imagination working , and so his groans had gathered quite a genuine tone .
sid flew downstairs and said : `` oh , aunt polly , come !
tom 's dying ! ''
`` dying ! ''
`` yes 'm .
do n't wait .
come quick ! ''
`` rubbage !
i do n't believe it ! ''
but she fled upstairs , nevertheless , with sid and mary at her heels .
and her face grew white , too , and her lip trembled .
when she reached the bedside she gasped out : `` you , tom !
tom , what 's the matter with you ? ''
`` oh , auntie , i'm. ``
`` what 's the matter with you .
what is the matter with you , child ? ''
`` oh , auntie , my sore toe 's mortified ! ''
the old lady sank down into a chair and laughed a little .
then cried a little , then did both together .
this restored her and she said : `` tom , what a turn you did give me .
now you shut up that nonsense and climb out of this . ''
the groans ceased and the pain vanished from the toe .
the boy felt a little foolish .
and he said : `` aunt polly .
it seemed mortified , and it hurt so i never minded my tooth at all . ''
`` your tooth , indeed !
what 's the matter with your tooth ? ''
`` one of them 's loose , and it aches perfectly awful . ''
`` there , there , now , do n't begin that groaning again .
open your mouth .
well .
your tooth is loose , but you 're not going to die about that .
mary , get me a silk thread , and a chunk of fire out of the kitchen . ''
tom said : `` oh , please , auntie , do n't pull it out .
it do n't hurt any more .
i wish i may never stir if it does .
please do n't , auntie .
i do n't want to stay home from school . ''
`` oh , you do n't , do n't you ?
so all this row was because you thought you'd get to stay home from school and go a-fishing ?
tom .
tom .
i love you so .
and you seem to try every way you can to break my old heart with your outrageousness . ''
by this time the dental instruments were ready .
the old lady made one end of the silk thread fast to tom
's tooth with a loop and tied the other to the bedpost .
then she seized the chunk of fire and suddenly thrust it almost into the boy 's face .
the tooth hung dangling by the bedpost , now .
but all trials bring their compensations .
as tom wended to school after breakfast .
he was the envy of every boy he met because the gap in his
upper row of teeth enabled him to expectorate in a new and admirable way .
he gathered quite a following of lads interested in the exhibition .
and one that had cut his finger and had been a centre of fascination and homage up to this time .
now found himself suddenly without an adherent , and shorn of his glory .
his heart was heavy .
and he said with a disdain which he did not feel
that it was n't anything to spit like tom sawyer .
but another boy said , `` sour grapes ! ''
and he wandered away a dismantled hero .
shortly tom came upon the juvenile pariah of the village , huckleberry finn , son of the town drunkard .
huckleberry was cordially hated and dreaded by all the mothers of the town .
because he was idle and lawless and vulgar and bad .
and because all their children admired him so .
and delighted in his forbidden society , and wished they dared to be like him .
tom was like the rest of the respectable boys .
in that he envied huckleberry his gaudy outcast condition , and was under strict orders not to play with him .
so he played with him every time he got a chance .
huckleberry was always dressed in the cast-off clothes of full-grown men .
and they were in perennial bloom and fluttering with rags .
his hat was a vast ruin with a wide crescent lopped out of its brim .
his coat .
when he wore one , hung nearly to his heels and had the rearward buttons far down the back .
but one suspender supported his trousers .
the seat of the trousers bagged low and contained nothing .
the fringed legs dragged in the dirt when not rolled up .
huckleberry came and went , at his own free will .
he slept on doorsteps in fine weather and in empty hogsheads in wet .
he did not have to go to school or to church , or call any being master or obey anybody .
he could go fishing or swimming when and where he chose , and stay as long as it suited him .
nobody forbade him to fight .
he could sit up as late as he pleased .
he was always the first boy that went barefoot in the
spring and the last to resume leather in the fall .
he never had to wash , nor put on clean clothes .
he could swear wonderfully .
in a word , everything that goes to make life precious that boy had .
so thought every harassed , hampered , respectable boy in st. petersburg .
tom hailed the romantic outcast : `` hello , huckleberry ! ''
`` hello yourself , and see how you like it . ''
`` what 's that you got ? ''
`` dead cat . ''
`` lem me see him , huck .
my , he 's pretty stiff .
where 'd you get him ? ''
`` bought him off ' n a boy . ''
`` what did you give ? ''
`` i give a blue ticket and a bladder that i got at the slaughter-house . ''
`` where 'd you get the blue ticket ? ''
`` bought it off ' n ben rogers two weeks ago for a hoop-stick . ''
`` say .
what is dead cats good for , huck ? ''
`` good for ?
cure warts with . ''
`` no !
is that so ?
i know something that 's better . ''
`` i bet you do n't .
what is it ? ''
`` why , spunk-water . ''
`` spunk-water !
i would n't give a dern for spunk-water . ''
`` you would n't , would n't you ?
d'you ever try it ? ''
`` no , i hai n't .
but bob tanner did . ''
`` who told you so ! ''
`` why .
he told jeff thatcher .
and jeff told johnny baker .
and johnny told jim hollis .
and jim told ben rogers , and ben told a nigger , and the nigger told me .
there now ! ''
`` well , what of it ?
they 'll all lie .
leastways all but the nigger .
i do n't know him .
but i never see a nigger that would n't lie .
shucks !
now you tell me how bob tanner done it , huck . ''
`` why , he took and dipped his hand in a rotten stump where the rain-water was . ''
`` in the daytime ? ''
`` certainly . ''
`` with his face to the stump ? ''
`` yes .
least i reckon so . ''
`` did he say anything ? ''
`` i do n't reckon he did .
i do n't know . ''
`` aha !
talk about trying to cure warts with spunk-water such a blame fool way as that !
why , that ai n't a-going to do any good .
you got to go all by yourself .
to the middle of the woods .
where you know there 's a spunk-water stump .
and just as it 's midnight you back up against the
stump and jam your hand in and say : 'barley-corn .
barley-corn , injun-meal shorts .
spunk-water , spunk-water .
swaller these warts .
' and then walk away quick .
eleven steps .
with your eyes shut , and then turn around three times and walk home without speaking to anybody .
because if you speak the charm 's busted . ''
`` well , that sounds like a good way .
but that ai n't the way bob tanner done . ''
`` no .
sir , you can bet he did n't , becuz he 's the wartiest boy in this town .
and he would n't have a wart on him if he 'd knowed how to work spunk-water .
i 've took off thousands of warts off of my hands that way , huck .
i play with frogs so much that i 've always got considerable many warts .
sometimes i take 'em off with a bean . ''
`` yes , bean 's good .
i 've done that . ''
`` have you ?
what 's your way ? ''
`` you take and split the bean .
and cut the wart so as to get some blood .
and then you put the blood on one piece of the bean and take and dig
a hole and bury it 'bout midnight at the crossroads in the dark of the moon .
and then you burn up the rest of the bean .
you see that piece that 's got the blood on it will keep drawing and drawing .
trying to fetch the other piece to it .
and so that helps the blood to draw the wart , and pretty soon off she comes . ''
`` yes , that 's it , huck .
that 's it .
though when you 're burying it if you say 'down bean .
off wart .
come no more to bother me ! '
it 's better .
that 's the way joe harper does , and he 's been nearly to coonville and most everywheres .
but say .
how do you cure 'em with dead cats ? ''
`` why .
you take your cat and go and get in the grave-yard
'long about midnight when somebody that was wicked has been buried .
and when it's midnight a devil will come .
or maybe two or three .
but you ca n't see 'em .
you can only hear something like the wind , or maybe hear 'em talk .
and when they 're taking that feller away .
you heave your cat after 'em and say .
'devil follow corpse , cat follow devil , warts follow cat , i'm done with ye ! '
that 'll fetch any wart . ''
`` sounds right .
d'you ever try it , huck ? ''
`` no , but old mother hopkins told me . ''
`` well , i reckon it 's so , then .
becuz they say she 's a witch . ''
`` say !
why , tom , i know she is .
she witched pap .
pap says so his own self .
he come along one day .
and he see she was a-witching him .
so he took up a rock , and if she had n't dodged , he 'd a got her .
well .
that very night he rolled off ' n a shed wher ' he was a layin drunk .
and broke his arm . ''
`` why , that 's awful .
how did he know she was a-witching him ? ''
`` lord , pap can tell , easy .
pap says when they keep looking at you right stiddy , they 're a-witching you .
specially if they mumble .
becuz when they mumble they 're saying the lord 's prayer backards . ''
`` say , hucky , when you going to try the cat ? ''
`` to-night .
i reckon they 'll come after old hoss williams to-night . ''
`` but they buried him saturday .
did n't they get him saturday night ? ''
`` why , how you talk !
how could their charms work till midnight ? .
and then it 's sunday .
devils do n't slosh around much of a sunday , i don't reckon . ''
`` i never thought of that .
that 's so .
lem me go with you ? ''
`` of course .
if you ai n't afeard . ''
`` afeard !
'tai n't likely .
will you meow ? ''
`` yes .
and you meow back , if you get a chance .
last time .
you kep ' me a-meowing around till old hays went to
throwing rocks at me and says 'dern that cat ! '
and so i hove a brick through his window .
but do n't you tell . ''
`` i wo n't .
i could n't meow that night , becuz auntie was watching me , but i 'll meow this time .
say .
what 's that ? ''
`` nothing but a tick . ''
`` where 'd you get him ? ''
`` out in the woods . ''
`` what 'll you take for him ? ''
`` i do n't know .
i do n't want to sell him . ''
`` all right .
it 's a mighty small tick , anyway . ''
`` oh , anybody can run a tick down that do n't belong to them .
i'm satisfied with it .
it 's a good enough tick for me . ''
`` sho , there 's ticks a plenty .
i could have a thousand of 'em if i wanted to . ''
`` well , why do n't you ?
becuz you know mighty well you ca n't .
this is a pretty early tick , i reckon .
it 's the first one i 've seen this year . ''
`` say , huck .
i 'll give you my tooth for him . ''
`` less see it . ''
tom got out a bit of paper and carefully unrolled it .
huckleberry viewed it wistfully .
the temptation was very strong .
at last he said : `` is it genuwyne ? ''
tom lifted his lip and showed the vacancy .
`` well , all right , '' said huckleberry , `` it 's a trade . ''
tom enclosed the tick in the percussion-cap box that had lately been the pinchbug 's prison .
and the boys separated , each feeling wealthier than before .
when tom reached the little isolated frame school-house .
he strode in briskly , with the manner of one who had come with all honest speed .
he hung his hat on a peg and flung himself into his seat with business-like alacrity .
the master .
throned on high in his great splint-bottom arm-chair , was dozing , lulled by the drowsy hum of study .
the interruption roused him .
`` thomas sawyer ! ''
tom knew that when his name was pronounced in full , it meant trouble .
`` sir ! ''
`` come up here .
now , sir , why are you late again , as usual ? ''
tom was about to take refuge in a lie .
when he saw two long tails of yellow hair hanging down
a back that he recognized by the electric sympathy of love .
and by that form was the only vacant place on the girls ' side of the school-house .
he instantly said : `` i stopped to talk with huckleberry finn ! ''
the master 's pulse stood still , and he stared helplessly .
the buzz of study ceased .
the pupils wondered if this foolhardy boy had lost his mind .
the master said : `` you .
you did what ? ''
`` stopped to talk with huckleberry finn . ''
there was no mistaking the words .
`` thomas sawyer , this is the most astounding confession i have ever listened to .
no mere ferule will answer for this offence .
take off your jacket . ''
the master 's arm performed until it was tired and the stock of switches notably diminished .
then the order followed : `` now , sir , go and sit with the girls !
and let this be a warning to you . ''
the titter that rippled around the room appeared to abash the boy .
but in reality that result was caused rather more by his worshipful awe of
his unknown idol and the dread pleasure that lay in his high good fortune .
he sat down upon the end of the pine bench and the
girl hitched herself away from him with a toss of her head .
nudges and winks and whispers traversed the room .
but tom sat still .
with his arms upon the long , low desk before him , and seemed to study his book .
by and by attention ceased from him , and the accustomed school murmur rose upon the dull air once more .
presently the boy began to steal furtive glances at the girl .
she observed it .
`` made a mouth '' at him and gave him the
back of her head for the space of a minute .
when she cautiously faced around again , a peach lay before her .
she thrust it away .
tom gently put it back .
she thrust it away again , but with less animosity .
tom patiently returned it to its place .
then she let it remain .
tom scrawled on his slate , `` please take it .
i got more . ''
the girl glanced at the words , but made no sign .
now the boy began to draw something on the slate , hiding his work with his left hand .
for a time the girl refused to notice .
but her human curiosity presently began to manifest itself by hardly perceptible signs .
the boy worked on , apparently unconscious .
the girl made a sort of non-committal attempt to see .
but the boy did not betray that he was aware of it .
at last she gave in and hesitatingly whispered : `` let me see it . ''
tom partly uncovered a dismal caricature of a house with two gable
ends to it and a corkscrew of smoke issuing from the chimney .
then the girl's interest began to fasten itself upon the work and she forgot everything else .
when it was finished , she gazed a moment , then whispered : `` it 's nice .
make a man . ''
the artist erected a man in the front yard , that resembled a derrick .
he could have stepped over the house .
but the girl was not hypercritical .
she was satisfied with the monster , and whispered : `` it 's a beautiful man .
now make me coming along . ''
tom drew an hour-glass with a full moon and straw limbs
to it and armed the spreading fingers with a portentous fan .
the girl said : `` it 's ever so nice .
i wish i could draw . ''
`` it 's easy , '' whispered tom , `` i 'll learn you . ''
`` oh , will you ?
when ? ''
`` at noon .
do you go home to dinner ? ''
`` i 'll stay if you will . ''
`` good .
that 's a whack .
what 's your name ? ''
`` becky thatcher .
what 's yours ?
oh , i know .
it 's thomas sawyer . ''
`` that 's the name they lick me by .
i 'm tom when i 'm good .
you call me tom , will you ? ''
`` yes . ''
now tom began to scrawl something on the slate , hiding the words from the girl .
but she was not backward this time .
she begged to see .
tom said : `` oh , it ai n't anything . ''
`` yes it is . ''
`` no it ai n't .
you do n't want to see . ''
`` yes i do , indeed i do .
please let me . ''
`` you 'll tell . ''
`` no i wo n't .
deed and deed and double deed wo n't . ''
`` you wo n't tell anybody at all ?
ever , as long as you live ? ''
`` no , i wo n't ever tell anybody .
now let me . ''
`` oh , you do n't want to see ! ''
`` now that you treat me so , i will see . ''
and she put her small hand upon his and a little scuffle ensued .
tom pretending to resist in earnest but letting his hand slip by
degrees till these words were revealed : `` i love you . ''
`` oh , you bad thing ! ''
and she hit his hand a smart rap , but reddened and looked pleased , nevertheless .
just at this juncture the boy felt a slow .
fateful grip closing on his ear , and a steady lifting impulse .
in that wise he was borne across the house and deposited in his own seat .
under a peppering fire of giggles from the whole school .
then the master stood over him during a few awful moments .
and finally moved away to his throne without saying a word .
but although tom 's ear tingled , his heart was jubilant .
as the school quieted down tom made an honest effort to study .
but the turmoil within him was too great .
in turn he took his place in the reading class and made a botch of it .
then in the geography class and turned lakes into mountains .
mountains into rivers , and rivers into continents , till chaos was come again .
then in the spelling class .
and got `` turned down .
'' by a succession of mere baby words .
till he brought up at the foot and yielded up the
pewter medal which he had worn with ostentation for months .
the harder tom tried to fasten his mind on his book , the more his ideas wandered .
so at last , with a sigh and a yawn , he gave it up .
it seemed to him that the noon recess would never come .
the air was utterly dead .
there was not a breath stirring .
it was the sleepiest of sleepy days .
the drowsing murmur of the five and twenty studying scholars soothed the
soul like the spell that is in the murmur of bees .
away off in the flaming sunshine .
cardiff hill lifted its soft green sides through a shimmering veil of heat , tinted with the purple of distance .
a few birds floated on lazy wing high in the air .
no other living thing was visible but some cows , and they were asleep .
tom 's heart ached to be free .
or else to have something of interest to do to pass the dreary time .
his hand wandered into his pocket and his face lit up with a glow of gratitude that was prayer .
though he did not know it .
then furtively the percussion-cap box came out .
he released the tick and put him on the long flat desk .
the creature probably glowed with a gratitude that amounted to prayer .
too .
at this moment .
but it was premature : for when he started thankfully to travel off .
tom turned him aside with a pin and made him take a new direction .
tom 's bosom friend sat next him .
suffering just as tom had been .
and now he was deeply and gratefully interested in this entertainment in an instant .
this bosom friend was joe harper .
the two boys were sworn friends all the week , and embattled enemies on saturdays .
joe took a pin out of his lapel and began to assist in exercising the prisoner .
the sport grew in interest momently .
soon tom said that they were interfering with each other , and neither getting the fullest benefit of the tick .
so he put joe 's slate on the desk and drew
a line down the middle of it from top to bottom .
`` now .
'' said he .
`` as long as he is on your side you can stir him up and i 'll let him alone .
but if you let him get away and get on my side .
you 're to leave him alone as long as i can keep him from crossing over . ''
`` all right , go ahead .
start him up . ''
the tick escaped from tom , presently , and crossed the equator .
joe harassed him awhile , and then he got away and crossed back again .
this change of base occurred often .
while one boy was worrying the tick with absorbing interest .
the other would look on with interest as strong .
the two heads bowed together over the slate , and the two souls dead to all things else .
at last luck seemed to settle and abide with joe .
the tick tried this .
that .
and the other course .
and got as excited and as anxious as the boys themselves .
but time and again just as he would have victory in his very grasp .
so to speak .
and tom 's fingers would be twitching to begin .
joe 's pin would deftly head him off , and keep possession .
at last tom could stand it no longer .
the temptation was too strong .
so he reached out and lent a hand with his pin .
joe was angry in a moment .
said he : `` tom , you let him alone . ''
`` i only just want to stir him up a little , joe . ''
`` no , sir , it ai n't fair .
you just let him alone . ''
`` blame it , i ai n't going to stir him much . ''
`` let him alone , i tell you . ''
`` i wo n't ! ''
`` you shall .
he 's on my side of the line . ''
`` look here , joe harper , whose is that tick ? ''
`` i do n't care whose tick he is .
he 's on my side of the line , and you sha ' n't touch him . ''
`` well , i 'll just bet i will , though .
he 's my tick and i 'll do what i blame please with him , or die ! ''
a tremendous whack came down on tom 's shoulders , and its duplicate on joe 's .
and for the space of two minutes the dust continued to fly
from the two jackets and the whole school to enjoy it .
the boys had been too absorbed to notice the hush that had stolen upon the
school awhile before when the master came tiptoeing down the room and stood over them .
he had contemplated a good part of the performance before he contributed his bit of variety to it .
when school broke up at noon .
tom flew to becky thatcher .
and whispered in her ear : `` put on your bonnet and let on you 're going home .
and when you get to the corner .
give the rest of 'em the slip , and turn down through the lane and come back .
i 'll go the other way and come it over 'em the same way . ''
so the one went off with one group of scholars , and the other with another .
in a little while the two met at the bottom of the lane .
and when they reached the school they had it all to themselves .
then they sat together .
with a slate before them .
and tom gave becky the pencil and held her hand in his .
guiding it , and so created another surprising house .
when the interest in art began to wane , the two fell to talking .
tom was swimming in bliss .
he said : `` do you love rats ? ''
`` no !
i hate them ! ''
`` well , i do , too .
live ones .
but i mean dead ones , to swing round your head with a string . ''
`` no , i do n't care for rats much , anyway .
what i like is chewing-gum . ''
`` oh , i should say so !
i wish i had some now . ''
`` do you ?
i 've got some .
i 'll let you chew it awhile , but you must give it back to me . ''
that was agreeable .
so they chewed it turn about , and dangled their legs against the bench in excess of contentment .
`` was you ever at a circus ? ''
said tom .
`` yes , and my pa 's going to take me again some time , if i 'm good . ''
`` i been to the circus three or four times .
lots of times .
church ain't shucks to a circus .
there 's things going on at a circus all the time .
i 'm going to be a clown in a circus when i grow up . ''
`` oh , are you !
that will be nice .
they 're so lovely , all spotted up . ''
`` yes , that 's so .
and they get slathers of money .
most a dollar a day , ben rogers says .
say , becky , was you ever engaged ? ''
`` what 's that ? ''
`` why , engaged to be married . ''
`` no . ''
`` would you like to ? ''
`` i reckon so .
i do n't know .
what is it like ? ''
`` like ?
why it ai n't like anything .
you only just tell a boy you won't ever have anybody but him .
ever ever ever , and then you kiss and that's all .
anybody can do it . ''
`` kiss ?
what do you kiss for ? ''
`` why , that , you know , is to .
well , they always do that . ''
`` everybody ? ''
`` why , yes , everybody that 's in love with each other .
do you remember what i wrote on the slate ? ''
`` ye .
yes . ''
`` what was it ? ''
`` i sha ' n't tell you . ''
`` shall i tell you ? ''
`` ye .
yes .
but some other time . ''
`` no , now . ''
`` no , not now .
to-morrow . ''
`` oh , no , now .
please , becky .
i 'll whisper it , i 'll whisper it ever so easy . ''
becky hesitating .
tom took silence for consent .
and passed his arm about her waist and whispered the tale ever so softly .
with his mouth close to her ear .
and then he added : `` now you whisper it to me .
just the same . ''
she resisted .
for a while .
and then said : `` you turn your face away so you ca n't see , and then i will .
but you must n't ever tell anybody .
will you , tom ?
now you wo n't , will you ? ''
`` no , indeed , indeed i wo n't .
now , becky . ''
he turned his face away .
she bent timidly around till her breath stirred his curls and whispered , `` i. love .
you ! ''
then she sprang away and ran around and around the desks and benches .
with tom after her .
and took refuge in a corner at last , with her little white apron to her face .
tom clasped her about her neck and pleaded : `` now , becky , it 's all done .
all over but the kiss .
do n't you be afraid of that .
it ai n't anything at all .
please , becky . ''
and he tugged at her apron and the hands .
by and by she gave up , and let her hands drop .
her face , all glowing with the struggle , came up and submitted .
tom kissed the red lips and said : `` now it 's all done , becky .
and always after this .
you know .
you ain't ever to love anybody but me .
and you ai n't ever to marry anybody but me , ever never and forever .
will you ? ''
`` no .
i 'll never love anybody but you , tom , and i 'll never marry anybody but you .
and you ai n't to ever marry anybody but me , either . ''
`` certainly .
of course .
that 's part of it .
and always coming to school or when we 're going home .
you 're to walk with me , when there ain't anybody looking .
and you choose me and i choose you at parties .
because that 's the way you do when you 're engaged . ''
`` it 's so nice .
i never heard of it before . ''
`` oh , it 's ever so gay !
why , me and amy lawrence. ``
the big eyes told tom his blunder and he stopped , confused .
`` oh , tom !
then i ai n't the first you 've ever been engaged to ! ''
the child began to cry .
tom said : `` oh .
do n't cry , becky , i do n't care for her any more . ''
`` yes , you do , tom .
you know you do . ''
tom tried to put his arm about her neck .
but she pushed him away and turned her face to the wall , and went on crying .
tom tried again , with soothing words in his mouth , and was repulsed again .
then his pride was up , and he strode away and went outside .
he stood about .
restless and uneasy .
for a while .
glancing at the door , every now and then , hoping she would repent and come to find him .
but she did not .
then he began to feel badly and fear that he was in the wrong .
it was a hard struggle with him to make new advances .
now , but he nerved himself to it and entered .
she was still standing back there in the corner , sobbing , with her face to the wall .
tom 's heart smote him .
he went to her and stood a moment , not knowing exactly how to proceed .
then he said hesitatingly : `` becky , i. i do n't care for anybody but you . ''
no reply .
but sobs .
`` becky '' .
pleadingly .
`` becky , wo n't you say something ? ''
more sobs .
tom got out his chiefest jewel .
a brass knob from the top of an andiron .
and passed it around her so that she could see it .
and said : `` please , becky , wo n't you take it ? ''
she struck it to the floor .
then tom marched out of the house and over the hills and far away .
to return to school no more that day .
presently becky began to suspect .
she ran to the door .
he was not in sight .
she flew around to the play-yard .
he was not there .
then she called : `` tom !
come back , tom ! ''
she listened intently , but there was no answer .
she had no companions but silence and loneliness .
so she sat down to cry again and upbraid herself .
and by this time the scholars began to gather again .
and she had to hide her griefs and still her broken heart and take up the cross of a long .
dreary , aching afternoon , with none among the strangers about her to exchange sorrows with .
tom dodged hither and thither through lanes until he was well out of the track of returning scholars .
and then fell into a moody jog .
he crossed a small `` branch '' two or three times .
because of a prevailing juvenile superstition that to cross water baffled pursuit .
half an hour later he was disappearing behind the douglas mansion on the summit of cardiff hill .
and the school-house was hardly distinguishable away off in the valley behind him .
he entered a dense wood .
picked his pathless way to the centre of it .
and sat down on a mossy spot under a spreading oak .
there was not even a zephyr stirring .
the dead noonday heat had even stilled the songs of the birds .
nature lay in a trance that was broken by no sound but the occasional far-off hammering of a wood-pecker .
and this seemed to render the pervading silence and sense of loneliness the more profound .
the boy 's soul was steeped in melancholy .
his feelings were in happy accord with his surroundings .
he sat long with his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands , meditating .
it seemed to him that life was but a trouble .
at best , and he more than half envied jimmy hodges , so lately released .
it must be very peaceful .
he thought .
to lie and slumber and dream forever and ever .
with the wind whispering through the trees and caressing the grass and the flowers over the grave .
and nothing to bother and grieve about , ever any more .
if he only had a clean sunday-school record he could be willing to go .
and be done with it all .
now as to this girl .
what had he done ?
nothing .
he had meant the best in the world , and been treated like a dog .
like a very dog .
she would be sorry some day .
maybe when it was too late .
ah , if he could only die temporarily !
but the elastic heart of youth can not be compressed into one constrained shape long at a time .
tom presently began to drift insensibly back into the concerns of this life again .
what if he turned his back , now , and disappeared mysteriously ?
what if he went away .
ever so far away , into unknown countries beyond the seas .
and never came back any more !
how would she feel then !
the idea of being a clown recurred to him now , only to fill him with disgust .
for frivolity and jokes and spotted tights were an offense .
when they intruded themselves upon a spirit that was exalted into the vague august realm of the romantic .
no , he would be a soldier , and return after long years , all war-worn and illustrious .
no .
better still .
he would join the indians .
and hunt buffaloes and go on the warpath in the mountain
ranges and the trackless great plains of the far west .
and away in the future come back a great chief .
bristling with feathers .
hideous with paint .
and prance into sunday-school .
some drowsy summer morning .
with a blood-curdling war-whoop , and sear the eyeballs of all his companions with unappeasable envy .
but no , there was something gaudier even than this .
he would be a pirate !
that was it !
now his future lay plain before him , and glowing with unimaginable splendor .
how his name would fill the world , and make people shudder !
how gloriously he would go plowing the dancing seas .
in his long .
low , black-hulled racer , the spirit of the storm , with his grisly flag flying at the fore !
and at the zenith of his fame .
how he would suddenly appear at the old village and stalk into church .
brown and weather-beaten .
in his black velvet doublet and trunks .
his great jack-boots .
his crimson sash .
his belt bristling with horse-pistols .
his crime-rusted cutlass at his side .
his slouch hat with waving plumes .
his black flag unfurled .
with the skull and crossbones on it .
and hear with swelling ecstasy the whisperings , `` it 's tom sawyer the pirate ! .
the black avenger of the spanish main ! ''
yes , it was settled .
his career was determined .
he would run away from home and enter upon it .
he would start the very next morning .
therefore he must now begin to get ready .
he would collect his resources together .
he went to a rotten log near at hand and began
to dig under one end of it with his barlow knife .
he soon struck wood that sounded hollow .
he put his hand there and uttered this incantation impressively : `` what has n't come here , come !
what 's here , stay here ! ''
then he scraped away the dirt , and exposed a pine shingle .
he took it up and disclosed a shapely little treasure-house whose bottom and sides were of shingles .
in it lay a marble .
tom 's astonishment was bound-less !
he scratched his head with a perplexed air , and said : `` well , that beats anything ! ''
then he tossed the marble away pettishly , and stood cogitating .
the truth was .
that a superstition of his had failed .
here , which he and all his comrades had always looked upon as infallible .
if you buried a marble with certain necessary incantations .
and left it alone a fortnight .
and then opened the place with the incantation he had just used .
you would find that all the marbles you had ever lost had gathered themselves together there .
meantime , no matter how widely they had been separated .
but now , this thing had actually and unquestionably failed .
tom 's whole structure of faith was shaken to its foundations .
he had many a time heard of this thing succeeding but never of its failing before .
it did not occur to him that he had tried it several times before .
himself , but could never find the hiding-places afterward .
he puzzled over the matter some time , and finally decided that some witch had interfered and broken the charm .
he thought he would satisfy himself on that point .
so he searched around till he found a small sandy spot with a little funnel-shaped depression in it .
he laid himself down and put his mouth close to this depression and called .
`` doodle-bug , doodle-bug , tell me what i want to know !
doodle-bug , doodle-bug , tell me what i want to know ! ''
the sand began to work .
and presently a small black bug appeared for a second and then darted under again in a fright .
`` he das n't tell !
so it was a witch that done it .
i just knowed it . ''
he well knew the futility of trying to contend against witches , so he gave up discouraged .
but it occurred to him that he might as well have the marble he had just thrown away .
and therefore he went and made a patient search for it .
but he could not find it .
now he went back to his treasure-house and carefully placed himself just
as he had been standing when he tossed the marble away .
then he took another marble from his pocket and tossed it in the same way .
saying : `` brother , go find your brother ! ''
he watched where it stopped , and went there and looked .
but it must have fallen short or gone too far .
so he tried twice more .
the last repetition was successful .
the two marbles lay within a foot of each other .
just here the blast of a toy tin trumpet came faintly down the green aisles of the forest .
tom flung off his jacket and trousers .
turned a suspender into a belt .
raked away some brush behind the rotten log .
disclosing a rude bow and arrow .
a lath sword and a tin trumpet .
and in a moment had seized these things and bounded away , barelegged , with fluttering shirt .
he presently halted under a great elm .
blew an answering blast , and then began to tiptoe and look warily out , this way and that .
he said cautiously .
to an imaginary company : `` hold , my merry men !
keep hid till i blow . ''
now appeared joe harper , as airily clad and elaborately armed as tom .
tom called : `` hold !
who comes here into sherwood forest without my pass ? ''
`` guy of guisborne wants no man 's pass .
who art thou that .
that. ``
`` dares to hold such language , '' said tom , prompting .
for they talked `` by the book , '' from memory .
`` who art thou that dares to hold such language ? ''
`` i , indeed !
i am robin hood , as thy caitiff carcase soon shall know . ''
`` then art thou indeed that famous outlaw ?
right gladly will i dispute with thee the passes of the merry wood .
have at thee ! ''
they took their lath swords .
dumped their other traps on the ground .
struck a fencing attitude .
foot to foot , and began a grave , careful combat , `` two up and two down . ''
presently tom said : `` now , if you 've got the hang , go it lively ! ''
so they `` went it lively , '' panting and perspiring with the work .
by and by tom shouted : `` fall !
fall !
why do n't you fall ? ''
`` i sha ' n't !
why do n't you fall yourself ?
you 're getting the worst of it . ''
`` why , that ai n't anything .
i ca n't fall .
that ai n't the way it is in the book .
the book says , 'then with one back-handed stroke he slew poor guy of guisborne . '
you 're to turn around and let me hit you in the back . ''
there was no getting around the authorities , so joe turned , received the whack and fell .
`` now , '' said joe , getting up , `` you got to let me kill you .
that's fair . ''
`` why , i ca n't do that , it ai n't in the book . ''
`` well , it 's blamed mean .
that 's all . ''
`` well .
say .
joe , you can be friar tuck or much the miller 's son , and lam me with a quarter-staff .
or i 'll be the sheriff of nottingham and you be robin hood a little while and kill me . ''
this was satisfactory , and so these adventures were carried out .
then tom became robin hood again .
and was allowed by the treacherous nun to bleed his strength away through his neglected wound .
and at last joe .
representing a whole tribe of weeping outlaws .
dragged him sadly forth .
gave his bow into his feeble hands .
and tom said , `` where this arrow falls , there bury poor robin hood under the greenwood tree . ''
then he shot the arrow and fell back and would have died .
but he lit on a nettle and sprang up too gaily for a corpse .
the boys dressed themselves .
hid their accoutrements .
and went off grieving that there were no outlaws any more .
and wondering what modern civilization could claim to have done to compensate for their loss .
they said they would rather be outlaws a year in sherwood forest than president of the united states forever .
at half-past nine , that night , tom and sid were sent to bed , as usual .
they said their prayers , and sid was soon asleep .
tom lay awake and waited , in restless impatience .
when it seemed to him that it must be nearly daylight , he heard the clock strike ten !
this was despair .
he would have tossed and fidgeted , as his nerves demanded , but he was afraid he might wake sid .
so he lay still , and stared up into the dark .
everything was dismally still .
by and by , out of the stillness , little , scarcely perceptible noises began to emphasize themselves .
the ticking of the clock began to bring itself into notice .
old beams began to crack mysteriously .
the stairs creaked faintly .
evidently spirits were abroad .
a measured , muffled snore issued from aunt polly 's chamber .
and now the tiresome chirping of a cricket that no human ingenuity could locate , began .
next the ghastly ticking of a death-watch in the wall at the bed 's head made tom shudder .
it meant that somebody 's days were numbered .
then the howl of a far-off dog rose on the night air .
and was answered by a fainter howl from a remoter distance .
tom was in an agony .
at last he was satisfied that time had ceased and eternity begun .
he began to doze , in spite of himself .
the clock chimed eleven , but he did not hear it .
and then there came , mingling with his half-formed dreams , a most melancholy caterwauling .
the raising of a neighboring window disturbed him .
a cry of `` scat !
you devil ! ''
and the crash of an empty bottle against the back of his aunt 's woodshed brought him wide awake .
and a single minute later he was dressed and out of the window
and creeping along the roof of the `` ell '' on all fours .
he `` meow 'd '' with caution once or twice , as he went .
then jumped to the roof of the woodshed and thence to the ground .
huckleberry finn was there , with his dead cat .
the boys moved off and disappeared in the gloom .
at the end of half an hour they were wading through the tall grass of the graveyard .
it was a graveyard of the old-fashioned western kind .
it was on a hill , about a mile and a half from the village .
it had a crazy board fence around it .
which leaned inward in places , and outward the rest of the time , but stood upright nowhere .
grass and weeds grew rank over the whole cemetery .
all the old graves were sunken in , there was not a tombstone on the place .
round-topped , worm-eaten boards staggered over the graves , leaning for support and finding none .
`` sacred to the memory of '' so-and-so had been painted on them once .
but it could no longer have been read .
on the most of them , now , even if there had been light .
a faint wind moaned through the trees .
and tom feared it might be the spirits of the dead , complaining at being disturbed .
the boys talked little .
and only under their breath .
for the time and the place and the pervading solemnity and silence oppressed their spirits .
they found the sharp new heap they were seeking .
and ensconced themselves within the protection of three great elms that
grew in a bunch within a few feet of the grave .
then they waited in silence for what seemed a long time .
the hooting of a distant owl was all the sound that troubled the dead stillness .
tom's reflections grew oppressive .
he must force some talk .
so he said in a whisper : `` hucky .
do you believe the dead people like it for us to be here ? ''
huckleberry whispered : `` i wisht i knowed .
it 's awful solemn like , ai n't it ? ''
`` i bet it is . ''
there was a considerable pause , while the boys canvassed this matter inwardly .
then tom whispered : `` say , hucky .
do you reckon hoss williams hears us talking ? ''
`` o ' course he does .
least his sperrit does . ''
tom , after a pause : `` i wish i 'd said mister williams .
but i never meant any harm .
everybody calls him hoss . ''
`` a body ca n't be too partic'lar how they talk 'bout these-yer dead people , tom . ''
this was a damper , and conversation died again .
presently tom seized his comrade 's arm and said : `` sh ! ''
`` what is it , tom ? ''
and the two clung together with beating hearts .
`` sh !
there 't is again !
did n't you hear it ? ''
`` i. ``
`` there !
now you hear it . ''
`` lord , tom , they 're coming !
they 're coming , sure .
what 'll we do ? ''
`` i dono .
think they 'll see us ? ''
`` oh , tom , they can see in the dark , same as cats .
i wisht i hadn't come . ''
`` oh , do n't be afeard .
i do n't believe they 'll bother us .
we ai n't doing any harm .
if we keep perfectly still , maybe they wo n't notice us at all . ''
`` i 'll try to , tom , but , lord , i 'm all of a shiver . ''
`` listen ! ''
the boys bent their heads together and scarcely breathed .
a muffled sound of voices floated up from the far end of the graveyard .
`` look !
see there ! ''
whispered tom .
`` what is it ? ''
`` it 's devil-fire .
oh , tom , this is awful . ''
some vague figures approached through the gloom .
swinging an old-fashioned tin lantern that freckled the ground with innumerable little spangles of light .
presently huckleberry whispered with a shudder : `` it 's the devils sure enough .
three of 'em !
lordy , tom , we 're goners !
can you pray ? ''
`` i 'll try , but do n't you be afeard .
they ai n't going to hurt us .
'now i lay me down to sleep , i . ' ''
`` sh ! ''
`` what is it , huck ? ''
`` they 're humans !
one of 'em is , anyway .
one of 'em 's old muff potter's voice . ''
`` no .
'tai n't so , is it ? ''
`` i bet i know it .
do n't you stir nor budge .
he ai n't sharp enough to notice us .
drunk , the same as usual , likely .
blamed old rip ! ''
`` all right , i 'll keep still .
now they 're stuck .
ca n't find it .
here they come again .
now they 're hot .
cold again .
hot again .
red hot !
they're p'inted right , this time .
say , huck , i know another o ' them voices .
it's injun joe . ''
`` that 's so .
that murderin ' half-breed !
i 'd druther they was devils a dern sight .
what kin they be up to ? ''
the whisper died wholly out .
now .
for the three men had reached the grave and stood within a few feet of the boys ' hiding-place .
`` here it is , '' said the third voice .
and the owner of it held the lantern up and revealed the face of young doctor robinson .
potter and injun joe were carrying a handbarrow with a rope and a couple of shovels on it .
they cast down their load and began to open the grave .
the doctor put the lantern at the head of the grave and came
and sat down with his back against one of the elm trees .
he was so close the boys could have touched him .
`` hurry , men ! ''
he said , in a low voice .
`` the moon might come out at any moment . ''
they growled a response and went on digging .
for some time there was no noise but the grating sound
of the spades discharging their freight of mould and gravel .
it was very monotonous .
finally a spade struck upon the coffin with a dull woody accent .
and within another minute or two the men had hoisted it out on the ground .
they pried off the lid with their shovels , got out the body and dumped it rudely on the ground .
the moon drifted from behind the clouds and exposed the pallid face .
the barrow was got ready and the corpse placed on it .
covered with a blanket , and bound to its place with the rope .
potter took out a large spring-knife and cut off the dangling end of
the rope and then said : `` now the cussed thing 's ready .
sawbones , and you 'll just out with another five , or here she stays . ''
`` that 's the talk ! ''
said injun joe .
`` look here , what does this mean ? ''
said the doctor .
`` you required your pay in advance , and i 've paid you . ''
`` yes .
and you done more than that , '' said injun joe , approaching the doctor , who was now standing .
`` five years ago you drove me away from your father 's kitchen one night .
when i come to ask for something to eat , and you said i war n't there for any good .
and when i swore i 'd get even with you if it took a hundred years .
your father had me jailed for a vagrant .
did you think i 'd forget ?
the injun blood ai n't in me for nothing .
and now i 've got you , and you got to settle , you know ! ''
he was threatening the doctor , with his fist in his face , by this time .
the doctor struck out suddenly and stretched the ruffian on the ground .
potter dropped his knife , and exclaimed : `` here , now , do n't you hit my pard ! ''
and the next moment he had grappled with the doctor and the two were struggling with might and main .
trampling the grass and tearing the ground with their heels .
injun joe sprang to his feet .
his eyes flaming with passion .
snatched up potter's knife .
and went creeping , catlike and stooping , round and round about the combatants , seeking an opportunity .
all at once the doctor flung himself free .
seized the heavy headboard of williams ' grave and felled potter to the earth with it .
and in the same instant the half-breed saw his chance and drove
the knife to the hilt in the young man 's breast .
he reeled and fell partly upon potter .
flooding him with his blood .
and in the same moment the clouds blotted out the dreadful spectacle
and the two frightened boys went speeding away in the dark .
presently , when the moon emerged again , injun joe was standing over the two forms , contemplating them .
the doctor murmured inarticulately , gave a long gasp or two and was still .
the half-breed muttered : `` that score is settled .
damn you . ''
then he robbed the body .
after which he put the fatal knife in potter's open right hand , and sat down on the dismantled coffin .
three .
four .
five minutes passed , and then potter began to stir and moan .
his hand closed upon the knife .
he raised it , glanced at it , and let it fall , with a shudder .
then he sat up .
pushing the body from him , and gazed at it , and then around him , confusedly .
his eyes met joe 's .
`` lord , how is this , joe ? ''
he said .
`` it 's a dirty business , '' said joe , without moving .
`` what did you do it for ? ''
`` i !
i never done it ! ''
`` look here !
that kind of talk wo n't wash. '' potter trembled and grew white .
`` i thought i 'd got sober .
i 'd no business to drink to-night .
but it's in my head yet .
worse ' n when we started here .
i 'm all in a muddle .
ca n't recollect anything of it , hardly .
tell me , joe .
honest , now , old feller .
did i do it ?
joe , i never meant to .
'pon my soul and honor , i never meant to , joe .
tell me how it was , joe .
oh , it 's awful .
and him so young and promising . ''
`` why , you two was scuffling , and he fetched you one with the headboard and you fell flat .
and then up you come .
all reeling and staggering like .
and snatched the knife and jammed it into him , just as he fetched you another awful clip .
and here you 've laid , as dead as a wedge til now . ''
`` oh , i did n't know what i was a-doing .
i wish i may die this minute if i did .
it was all on account of the whiskey and the excitement , i reckon .
i never used a weepon in my life before , joe .
i 've fought , but never with weepons .
they 'll all say that .
joe , do n't tell !
say you wo n't tell , joe .
that 's a good feller .
i always liked you , joe , and stood up for you , too .
do n't you remember ?
you wo n't tell , will you , joe ? ''
and the poor creature dropped on his knees before the stolid murderer , and clasped his appealing hands .
`` no .
you 've always been fair and square with me .
muff potter , and i wo n't go back on you .
there , now , that 's as fair as a man can say . ''
`` oh , joe , you 're an angel .
i 'll bless you for this the longest day i live . ''
and potter began to cry .
`` come , now , that 's enough of that .
this ai n't any time for blubbering .
you be off yonder way and i 'll go this .
move , now , and do n't leave any tracks behind you . ''
potter started on a trot that quickly increased to a run .
the half-breed stood looking after him .
he muttered : `` if he 's as much stunned with the lick
and fuddled with the rum as he had the look of being .
he wo n't think of the knife till he 's gone so far he
'll be afraid to come back after it to such a place by himself .
chicken-heart ! ''
two or three minutes later the murdered man .
the blanketed corpse , the lidless coffin , and the open grave were under no inspection but the moon 's .
the stillness was complete again , too .
the two boys flew on and on , toward the village , speechless with horror .
they glanced backward over their shoulders from time to time .
apprehensively , as if they feared they might be followed .
every stump that started up in their path seemed a man and an enemy .
and made them catch their breath .
and as they sped by some outlying cottages that lay near the village .
the barking of the aroused watch-dogs seemed to give wings to their feet .
`` if we can only get to the old tannery before we break down ! ''
whispered tom , in short catches between breaths .
`` i ca n't stand it much longer . ''
huckleberry 's hard pantings were his only reply .
and the boys fixed their eyes on the goal of their hopes and bent to their work to win it .
they gained steadily on it .
and at last .
breast to breast , they burst through the open door and fell grateful and exhausted in the sheltering shadows beyond .
by and by their pulses slowed down .
and tom whispered : `` huckleberry , what do you reckon 'll come of this ? ''
`` if doctor robinson dies , i reckon hanging 'll come of it . ''
`` do you though ? ''
`` why , i know it , tom . ''
tom thought a while , then he said : `` who 'll tell ?
we ? ''
`` what are you talking about ?
s'pose something happened and injun joe did n't hang ?
why .
he 'd kill us some time or other , just as dead sure as we 're a laying here . ''
`` that 's just what i was thinking to myself , huck . ''
`` if anybody tells , let muff potter do it , if he 's fool enough .
he's generally drunk enough . ''
tom said nothing .
went on thinking .
presently he whispered : `` huck , muff potter do n't know it .
how can he tell ? ''
`` what 's the reason he do n't know it ? ''
`` because he 'd just got that whack when injun joe done it .
d'you reckon he could see anything ?
d'you reckon he knowed anything ? ''
`` by hokey , that 's so , tom ! ''
`` and besides , look-a-here .
maybe that whack done for him ! ''
`` no , 'taint likely , tom .
he had liquor in him .
i could see that .
and besides , he always has .
well .
when pap 's full .
you might take and belt him over the head with a church and you could n't phase him .
he says so , his own self .
so it 's the same with muff potter , of course .
but if a man was dead sober , i reckon maybe that whack might fetch him .
i dono . ''
after another reflective silence , tom said : `` hucky , you sure you can keep mum ? ''
`` tom , we got to keep mum .
you know that .
that injun devil wouldn't make any more of drownding us than a couple of cats .
if we was to squeak 'bout this and they did n't hang him .
now , look-a-here , tom , less take and swear to one another .
that 's what we got to do .
swear to keep mum . ''
`` i 'm agreed .
it 's the best thing .
would you just hold hands and swear that we. ``
`` oh no , that would n't do for this .
that 's good enough for little rubbishy common things .
specially with gals , cuz they go back on you anyway , and blab if they get in a huff .
but there orter be writing 'bout a big thing like this .
and blood . ''
tom 's whole being applauded this idea .
it was deep , and dark , and awful .
the hour , the circumstances , the surroundings , were in keeping with it .
he picked up a clean pine shingle that lay in the moon-light .
took a little fragment of `` red keel '' out of his pocket .
got the moon on his work .
and painfully scrawled these lines .
emphasizing each slow down-stroke by clamping his tongue between his teeth , and letting up the pressure on the up-strokes .
[ see next page . ]
`` huck finn and tom sawyer swears they will keep mum about this and they wish
they may drop down dead in their tracks if they ever tell and rot . ''
huckleberry was filled with admiration of tom 's facility in writing , and the sublimity of his language .
he at once took a pin from his lapel and was going to prick his flesh .
but tom said : `` hold on !
do n't do that .
a pin 's brass .
it might have verdigrease on it . ''
`` what 's verdigrease ? ''
`` it 's p'ison .
that 's what it is .
you just swaller some of it once .
you'll see . ''
so tom unwound the thread from one of his needles .
and each boy pricked the ball of his thumb and squeezed out a drop of blood .
in time .
after many squeezes .
tom managed to sign his initials , using the ball of his little finger for a pen .
then he showed huckleberry how to make an h and an f , and the oath was complete .
they buried the shingle close to the wall .
with some dismal ceremonies and incantations .
and the fetters that bound their tongues were considered to be locked and the key thrown away .
a figure crept stealthily through a break in the other end of the ruined building .
now , but they did not notice it .
`` tom , '' whispered huckleberry , `` does this keep us from ever telling .
always ? ''
`` of course it does .
it do n't make any difference what happens , we got to keep mum .
we 'd drop down dead .
do n't you know that ? ''
`` yes , i reckon that 's so . ''
they continued to whisper for some little time .
presently a dog set up a long , lugubrious howl just outside .
within ten feet of them .
the boys clasped each other suddenly , in an agony of fright .
`` which of us does he mean ? ''
gasped huckleberry .
`` i dono .
peep through the crack .
quick ! ''
`` no , you , tom ! ''
`` i ca n't .
i ca n't do it , huck ! ''
`` please , tom .
there 't is again ! ''
`` oh , lordy , i 'm thankful ! ''
whispered tom .
`` i know his voice .
it 's bull harbison . ''
* [ * if mr. harbison owned a slave named bull .
tom would have spoken of him as `` harbison 's bull .
'' but a son or a dog of that name was `` bull harbison . '' ]
`` oh , that 's good .
i tell you , tom , i was most scared to death .
i 'd a bet anything it was a stray dog . ''
the dog howled again .
the boys ' hearts sank once more .
`` oh , my !
that ai n't no bull harbison ! ''
whispered huckleberry .
`` do , tom ! ''
tom , quaking with fear , yielded , and put his eye to the crack .
his whisper was hardly audible when he said : `` oh , huck , its a stray dog ! ''
`` quick , tom , quick !
who does he mean ? ''
`` huck , he must mean us both .
we 're right together . ''
`` oh , tom , i reckon we 're goners .
i reckon there ai n't no mistake 'bout where i 'll go to .
i been so wicked . ''
`` dad fetch it !
this comes of playing hookey and doing everything a feller 's told not to do .
i might a been good , like sid , if i 'd a tried .
but no , i would n't , of course .
but if ever i get off this time , i lay i 'll just waller in sunday-schools ! ''
and tom began to snuffle a little .
`` you bad ! ''
and huckleberry began to snuffle too .
`` consound it , tom sawyer , you 're just old pie , 'long-side o ' what i am .
oh , lordy , lordy , lordy , i wisht i only had half your chance . ''
tom choked off and whispered : `` look , hucky , look !
he 's got his back to us ! ''
hucky looked , with joy in his heart .
`` well , he has , by jingoes !
did he before ? ''
`` yes , he did .
but i , like a fool , never thought .
oh , this is bully , you know .
now who can he mean ? ''
the howling stopped .
tom pricked up his ears .
`` sh !
what 's that ? ''
he whispered .
`` sounds like .
like hogs grunting .
no .
it 's somebody snoring , tom . ''
`` that is it !
where 'bouts is it , huck ? ''
`` i bleeve it 's down at 'tother end .
sounds so , anyway .
pap used to sleep there .
sometimes , 'long with the hogs , but laws bless you , he just lifts things when he snores .
besides , i reckon he ai n't ever coming back to this town any more . ''
the spirit of adventure rose in the boys ' souls once more .
`` hucky , do you das't to go if i lead ? ''
`` i do n't like to , much .
tom , s'pose it 's injun joe ! ''
tom quailed .
but presently the temptation rose up strong again and the boys agreed to try .
with the understanding that they would take to their heels if the snoring stopped .
so they went tiptoeing stealthily down , the one behind the other .
when they had got to within five steps of the snorer .
tom stepped on a stick , and it broke with a sharp snap .
the man moaned , writhed a little , and his face came into the moonlight .
it was muff potter .
the boys ' hearts had stood still .
and their hopes too , when the man moved , but their fears passed away now .
they tip-toed out , through the broken weather-boarding , and stopped at a little distance to exchange a parting word .
that long , lugubrious howl rose on the night air again !
they turned and saw the strange dog standing within a few feet of where potter was lying .
and facing potter , with his nose pointing heavenward .
`` oh , geeminy , it 's him ! ''
exclaimed both boys , in a breath .
`` say , tom .
they say a stray dog come howling around johnny miller's house .
'bout midnight , as much as two weeks ago .
and a whippoorwill come in and lit on the banisters and sung , the very same evening .
and there ai n't anybody dead there yet . ''
`` well , i know that .
and suppose there ai n't .
did n't gracie miller fall in the kitchen fire and burn herself terrible the very next saturday ? ''
`` yes , but she ai n't dead .
and what 's more , she 's getting better , too . ''
`` all right , you wait and see .
she 's a goner , just as dead sure as muff potter 's a goner .
that 's what the niggers say , and they know all about these kind of things , huck . ''
then they separated , cogitating .
when tom crept in at his bedroom window the night was almost spent .
he undressed with excessive caution , and fell asleep congratulating himself that nobody knew of his escapade .
he was not aware that the gently-snoring sid was awake , and had been so for an hour .
when tom awoke , sid was dressed and gone .
there was a late look in the light , a late sense in the atmosphere .
he was startled .
why had he not been called .
persecuted till he was up , as usual ?
the thought filled him with bodings .
within five minutes he was dressed and down-stairs , feeling sore and drowsy .
the family were still at table , but they had finished breakfast .
there was no voice of rebuke .
but there were averted eyes .
there was a silence and an air of solemnity that struck a chill to the culprit 's heart .
he sat down and tried to seem gay , but it was up-hill work .
it roused no smile .
no response , and he lapsed into silence and let his heart sink down to the depths .
after breakfast his aunt took him aside .
and tom almost brightened in the hope that he was going to be flogged .
but it was not so .
his aunt wept over him and asked him how he could go and break her old heart so .
and finally told him to go on .
and ruin himself and bring her gray hairs with sorrow to the grave .
for it was no use for her to try any more .
this was worse than a thousand whippings , and tom 's heart was sorer now than his body .
he cried .
he pleaded for forgiveness .
promised to reform over and over again .
and then received his dismissal .
feeling that he had won but an imperfect forgiveness and established but a feeble confidence .
he left the presence too miserable to even feel revengeful toward sid .
and so the latter 's prompt retreat through the back gate was unnecessary .
he moped to school gloomy and sad .
and took his flogging .
along with joe harper .
for playing hookey the day before .
with the air of one whose heart was busy with heavier woes and wholly dead to trifles .
then he betook himself to his seat .
rested his elbows on his desk and his jaws in his hands .
and stared at the wall with the stony stare of suffering
that has reached the limit and can no further go .
his elbow was pressing against some hard substance .
after a long time he slowly and sadly changed his position , and took up this object with a sigh .
it was in a paper .
he unrolled it .
a long , lingering , colossal sigh followed , and his heart broke .
it was his brass andiron knob !
this final feather broke the camel 's back .
close upon the hour of noon the whole village was suddenly electrified with the ghastly news .
no need of the as yet un-dreamed-of telegraph .
the tale flew from man to man .
from group to group , from house to house , with little less than telegraphic speed .
of course the schoolmaster gave holi-day for that afternoon .
the town would have thought strangely of him if he had not .
a gory knife had been found close to the murdered man .
and it had been recognized by somebody as belonging to muff potter .
so the story ran .
and it was said that a belated citizen had come upon potter washing himself
in the `` branch '' about one or two o'clock in the morning .
and that potter had at once sneaked off .
suspicious circumstances , especially the washing which was not a habit with potter .
it was also said that the town had been ransacked for this `` murderer '' ( the
public are not slow in the matter of sifting evidence and arriving at a verdict ) .
but that he could not be found .
horsemen had departed down all the roads in every direction .
and the sheriff `` was confident '' that he would be captured before night .
all the town was drifting toward the graveyard .
tom 's heartbreak vanished and he joined the procession .
not because he would not a thousand times rather go anywhere else .
but because an awful , unaccountable fascination drew him on .
arrived at the dreadful place , he wormed his small body through the crowd and saw the dismal spectacle .
it seemed to him an age since he was there before .
somebody pinched his arm .
he turned , and his eyes met huckleberry 's .
then both looked elsewhere at once , and wondered if anybody had noticed anything in their mutual glance .
but everybody was talking , and intent upon the grisly spectacle before them .
`` poor fellow ! ''
`` poor young fellow ! ''
`` this ought to be a lesson to grave robbers ! ''
`` muff potter 'll hang for this if they catch him ! ''
this was the drift of remark .
and the minister said , `` it was a judgment .
his hand is here . ''
now tom shivered from head to heel .
for his eye fell upon the stolid face of injun joe .
at this moment the crowd began to sway and struggle , and voices shouted , `` it 's him !
it 's him !
he 's coming himself ! ''
`` who ?
who ? ''
from twenty voices .
`` muff potter ! ''
`` hallo , he 's stopped ! .
look out , he 's turning !
do n't let him get away ! ''
people in the branches of the trees over tom 's head said he wasn't trying to get away .
he only looked doubtful and perplexed .
`` infernal impudence ! ''
said a bystander .
`` wanted to come and take a quiet look at his work , i reckon .
did n't expect any company . ''
the crowd fell apart , now , and the sheriff came through , ostentatiously leading potter by the arm .
the poor fellow 's face was haggard , and his eyes showed the fear that was upon him .
when he stood before the murdered man .
he shook as with a palsy , and he put his face in his hands and burst into tears .
`` i did n't do it , friends , '' he sobbed .
`` 'pon my word and honor i never done it . ''
`` who 's accused you ? ''
shouted a voice .
this shot seemed to carry home .
potter lifted his face and looked around him with a pathetic hopelessness in his eyes .
he saw injun joe , and exclaimed : `` oh , injun joe , you promised me you 'd never. ``
`` is that your knife ? ''
and it was thrust before him by the sheriff .
potter would have fallen if they had not caught him and eased him to the ground .
then he said : `` something told me 't if i did n't come back and get. ``
he shuddered .
then waved his nerveless hand with a vanquished gesture and said , `` tell 'em , joe , tell 'em .
it ai n't any use any more . ''
then huckleberry and tom stood dumb and staring .
and heard the stony-hearted liar reel off his serene statement .
they expecting every moment that the clear sky would deliver god 's lightnings upon his head .
and wondering to see how long the stroke was delayed .
and when he had finished and still stood alive and whole .
their wavering impulse to break their oath and save the poor betrayed prisoner 's life faded and vanished away .
for plainly this miscreant had sold himself to satan and it would be
fatal to meddle with the property of such a power as that .
`` why did n't you leave ?
what did you want to come here for ? ''
somebody said .
`` i could n't help it .
i could n't help it , '' potter moaned .
`` i wanted to run away , but i could n't seem to come anywhere but here . ''
and he fell to sobbing again .
injun joe repeated his statement , just as calmly , a few minutes afterward on the inquest , under oath .
and the boys .
seeing that the lightnings were still withheld .
were confirmed in their belief that joe had sold himself to the devil .
he was now become .
to them .
the most balefully interesting object they had ever looked upon .
and they could not take their fascinated eyes from his face .
they inwardly resolved to watch him nights .
when opportunity should offer , in the hope of getting a glimpse of his dread master .
injun joe helped to raise the body of the murdered man and put it in a wagon for removal .
and it was whispered through the shuddering crowd that the wound bled a little !
the boys thought that this happy circumstance would turn suspicion in the right direction .
but they were disappointed .
for more than one villager remarked : `` it was within
three feet of muff potter when it done it . ''
tom 's fearful secret and gnawing conscience disturbed his sleep for as much as a week after this .
and at breakfast one morning sid said : `` tom .
you pitch around and talk in your sleep so much that you keep me awake half the time . ''
tom blanched and dropped his eyes .
`` it 's a bad sign , '' said aunt polly , gravely .
`` what you got on your mind , tom ? ''
`` nothing .
nothing 't i know of . ''
but the boy 's hand shook so that he spilled his coffee .
`` and you do talk such stuff , '' sid said .
`` last night you said , 'it's blood , it 's blood , that 's what it is ! '
you said that over and over .
and you said , 'do n't torment me so .
i 'll tell ! '
tell what ?
what is it you 'll tell ? ''
everything was swimming before tom .
there is no telling what might have happened .
now .
but luckily the concern passed out of aunt polly 's face
and she came to tom 's relief without knowing it .
she said : `` sho !
it 's that dreadful murder .
i dream about it most every night myself .
sometimes i dream it 's me that done it . ''
mary said she had been affected much the same way .
sid seemed satisfied .
tom got out of the presence as quick as he plausibly could .
and after that he complained of toothache for a week , and tied up his jaws every night .
he never knew that sid lay nightly watching .
and frequently slipped the bandage free and then leaned on his elbow listening a good while at a time .
and afterward slipped the bandage back to its place again .
tom 's distress of mind wore off gradually and the toothache grew irksome and was discarded .
if sid really managed to make anything out of tom 's disjointed mutterings , he kept it to himself .
it seemed to tom that his schoolmates never would get done holding inquests on dead cats .
and thus keeping his trouble present to his mind .
sid noticed that tom never was coroner at one of these inquiries .
though it had been his habit to take the lead in all new enterprises .
he noticed , too , that tom never acted as a witness .
and that was strange .
and sid did not overlook the fact that tom even showed a marked aversion to these inquests .
and always avoided them when he could .
sid marvelled , but said nothing .
however , even inquests went out of vogue at last , and ceased to torture tom 's conscience .
every day or two .
during this time of sorrow .
tom watched his opportunity and went to the little grated jail-window and smuggled such
small comforts through to the `` murderer '' as he could get hold of .
the jail was a trifling little brick den that stood in a marsh at the edge of the village .
and no guards were afforded for it .
indeed , it was seldom occupied .
these offerings greatly helped to ease tom's conscience .
the villagers had a strong desire to tar-and-feather injun joe and ride him on a rail .
for body-snatching .
but so formidable was his character that nobody could be found
who was willing to take the lead in the matter .
so it was dropped .
he had been careful to begin both of his inquest-statements with the fight .
without confessing the grave-robbery that preceded it .
therefore it was deemed wisest not to try the case in the courts at present .
one of the reasons why tom 's mind had drifted away from its secret troubles was .
that it had found a new and weighty matter to interest itself about .
becky thatcher had stopped coming to school .
tom had struggled with his pride a few days .
and tried to `` whistle her down the wind , '' but failed .
he began to find himself hanging around her father's house , nights , and feeling very miserable .
she was ill. what if she should die !
there was distraction in the thought .
he no longer took an interest in war , nor even in piracy .
the charm of life was gone .
there was nothing but dreariness left .
he put his hoop away , and his bat .
there was no joy in them any more .
his aunt was concerned .
she began to try all manner of remedies on him .
she was one of those people who are infatuated with patent
medicines and all new-fangled methods of producing health or mending it .
she was an inveterate experimenter in these things .
when something fresh in this line came out she was in a fever , right away , to try it .
not on herself , for she was never ailing , but on anybody else that came handy .
she was a subscriber for all the '' health '' periodicals and phrenological frauds .
and the solemn ignorance they were inflated with was breath to her nostrils .
all the `` rot '' they contained about ventilation .
and how to go to bed .
and how to get up .
and what to eat .
and what to drink .
and how much exercise to take .
and what frame of mind to keep one 's self in .
and what sort of clothing to wear .
was all gospel to her .
and she never observed that her health-journals of the current month customarily upset everything they had recommended the month before .
she was as simple-hearted and honest as the day was long , and so she was an easy victim .
she gathered together her quack periodicals and her quack medicines .
and thus armed with death .
went about on her pale horse , metaphorically speaking , with '' hell following after . ''
but she never suspected that she was not an angel of healing and the balm of gilead in disguise .
to the suffering neighbors .
the water treatment was new , now , and tom 's low condition was a windfall to her .
she had him out at daylight every morning .
stood him up in the wood-shed and drowned him with a deluge of cold water .
then she scrubbed him down with a towel like a file , and so brought him to .
then she rolled him up in a wet sheet and put him away under blankets till she
sweated his soul clean and `` the yellow stains of it came through his pores '' .
as tom said .
yet notwithstanding all this , the boy grew more and more melancholy and pale and dejected .
she added hot baths , sitz baths , shower baths , and plunges .
the boy remained as dismal as a hearse .
she began to assist the water with a slim oatmeal diet and blister-plasters .
she calculated his capacity as she would a jug 's , and filled him up every day with quack cure-alls .
tom had become indifferent to persecution by this time .
this phase filled the old lady 's heart with consternation .
this indifference must be broken up at any cost .
now she heard of pain-killer for the first time .
she ordered a lot at once .
she tasted it and was filled with gratitude .
it was simply fire in a liquid form .
she dropped the water treatment and everything else , and pinned her faith to pain-killer .
she gave tom a teaspoonful and watched with the deepest anxiety for the result .
her troubles were instantly at rest , her soul at peace again .
for the `` indifference '' was broken up .
the boy could not have shown a wilder , heartier interest , if she had built a fire under him .
tom felt that it was time to wake up .
this sort of life might be romantic enough .
in his blighted condition .
but it was getting to have too little sentiment and too much distracting variety about it .
so he thought over various plans for relief .
and finally hit upon that of professing to be fond of pain-killer .
he asked for it so often that he became a nuisance .
and his aunt ended by telling him to help himself and quit bothering her .
if it had been sid , she would have had no misgivings to alloy her delight .
but since it was tom , she watched the bottle clandestinely .
she found that the medicine did really diminish .
but it did not occur to her that the boy was mending
the health of a crack in the sitting-room floor with it .
one day tom was in the act of dosing the crack when his aunt 's yellow cat came along .
purring , eyeing the teaspoon avariciously , and begging for a taste .
tom said : `` do n't ask for it unless you want it , peter . ''
but peter signified that he did want it .
`` you better make sure . ''
peter was sure .
`` now you 've asked for it .
and i 'll give it to you , because there ain't anything mean about me .
but if you find you do n't like it , you mustn't blame anybody but your own self . ''
peter was agreeable .
so tom pried his mouth open and poured down the pain-killer .
peter sprang a couple of yards in the air .
and then delivered a war-whoop and set off round and round the room .
banging against furniture , upsetting flower-pots , and making general havoc .
next he rose on his hind feet and pranced around .
in a frenzy of enjoyment , with his head over his shoulder and his voice proclaiming his unappeasable happiness .
then he went tearing around the house again spreading chaos and destruction in his path .
aunt polly entered in time to see him throw a few double summersets .
deliver a final mighty hurrah .
and sail through the open window , carrying the rest of the flower-pots with him .
the old lady stood petrified with astonishment , peering over her glasses .
tom lay on the floor expiring with laughter .
`` tom , what on earth ails that cat ? ''
`` i do n't know , aunt , '' gasped the boy .
`` why , i never see anything like it .
what did make him act so ? ''
`` deed i do n't know , aunt polly .
cats always act so when they 're having a good time . ''
`` they do , do they ? ''
there was something in the tone that made tom apprehensive .
`` yes 'm .
that is , i believe they do . ''
`` you do ? ''
`` yes 'm . ''
the old lady was bending down , tom watching , with interest emphasized by anxiety .
too late he divined her `` drift . ''
the handle of the telltale tea-spoon was visible under the bed-valance .
aunt polly took it , held it up .
tom winced , and dropped his eyes .
aunt polly raised him by the usual handle .
his ear .
and cracked his head soundly with her thimble .
`` now , sir , what did you want to treat that poor dumb beast so , for ? ''
`` i done it out of pity for him .
because he had n't any aunt . ''
`` had n't any aunt ! .
you numskull .
what has that got to do with it ? ''
`` heaps .
because if he 'd had one she 'd a burnt him out herself !
she 'd a roasted his bowels out of him 'thout any more feeling than if he was a human ! ''
aunt polly felt a sudden pang of remorse .
this was putting the thing in a new light .
what was cruelty to a cat might be cruelty to a boy , too .
she began to soften .
she felt sorry .
her eyes watered a little .
and she put her hand on tom 's head and said gently : `` i was meaning for the best .
tom .
and , tom , it did do you good . ''
tom looked up in her face with just a perceptible twinkle peeping through his gravity .
`` i know you was meaning for the best , aunty , and so was i with peter .
it done him good , too .
i never see him get around so since. ``
`` oh , go 'long with you , tom , before you aggravate me again .
and you try and see if you ca n't be a good boy .
for once , and you need n't take any more medicine . ''
tom reached school ahead of time .
it was noticed that this strange thing had been occurring every day latterly .
and now .
as usual of late , he hung about the gate of the schoolyard instead of playing with his comrades .
he was sick , he said , and he looked it .
he tried to seem to be looking everywhere but whither he really was looking .
down the road .
presently jeff thatcher hove in sight , and tom 's face lighted .
he gazed a moment , and then turned sorrowfully away .
when jeff arrived , tom accosted him .
and `` led up '' warily to opportunities for remark about becky .
but the giddy lad never could see the bait .
tom watched and watched .
hoping whenever a frisking frock came in sight .
and hating the owner of it as soon as he saw she was not the right one .
at last frocks ceased to appear , and he dropped hopelessly into the dumps .
he entered the empty schoolhouse and sat down to suffer .
then one more frock passed in at the gate , and tom 's heart gave a great bound .
the next instant he was out , and `` going on '' like an indian .
yelling , laughing .
chasing boys .
jumping over the fence at risk of life and limb , throwing handsprings , standing on his head .
doing all the heroic things he could conceive of .
and keeping a furtive eye out , all the while , to see if becky thatcher was noticing .
but she seemed to be unconscious of it all .
she never looked .
could it be possible that she was not aware that he was there ?
he carried his exploits to her immediate vicinity .
came war-whooping around .
snatched a boy 's cap .
hurled it to the roof of the schoolhouse .
broke through a group of boys .
tumbling them in every direction , and fell sprawling , himself , under becky 's nose , almost upsetting her .
and she turned , with her nose in the air , and he heard her say : `` mf !
some people think they 're mighty smart .
always showing off ! ''
tom 's cheeks burned .
he gathered himself up and sneaked off , crushed and crestfallen .
tom 's mind was made up now .
he was gloomy and desperate .
he was a forsaken , friendless boy , he said .
nobody loved him .
when they found out what they had driven him to , perhaps they would be sorry .
he had tried to do right and get along , but they would not let him .
since nothing would do them but to be rid of him , let it be so .
and let them blame him for the consequences .
why should n't they ?
what right had the friendless to complain ?
yes , they had forced him to it at last : he would lead a life of crime .
there was no choice .
by this time he was far down meadow lane .
and the bell for school to '' take up '' tinkled faintly upon his ear .
he sobbed , now , to think he should never , never hear that old familiar sound any more .
it was very hard , but it was forced on him .
since he was driven out into the cold world , he must submit .
but he forgave them .
then the sobs came thick and fast .
just at this point he met his soul 's sworn comrade , joe harper .
hard-eyed , and with evidently a great and dismal purpose in his heart .
plainly here were `` two souls with but a single thought . ''
tom .
wiping his eyes with his sleeve .
began to blubber out something about a resolution to escape from hard usage and lack
of sympathy at home by roaming abroad into the great world never to return .
and ended by hoping that joe would not forget him .
but it transpired that this was a request which joe had just been going to make of tom .
and had come to hunt him up for that purpose .
his mother had whipped him for drinking some cream which he had never tasted and knew nothing about .
it was plain that she was tired of him and wished him to go .
if she felt that way , there was nothing for him to do but succumb .
he hoped she would be happy .
and never regret having driven her poor boy out into the unfeeling world to suffer and die .
as the two boys walked sorrowing along .
they made a new compact to stand by each other and be
brothers and never separate till death relieved them of their troubles .
then they began to lay their plans .
joe was for being a hermit .
and living on crusts in a remote cave .
and dying , some time , of cold and want and grief .
but after listening to tom .
he conceded that there were some conspicuous advantages about a life of crime .
and so he consented to be a pirate .
three miles below st. petersburg .
at a point where the mississippi river was a trifle over a mile wide .
there was a long .
narrow .
wooded island , with a shallow bar at the head of it , and this offered well as a rendezvous .
it was not inhabited .
it lay far over toward the further shore , abreast a dense and almost wholly unpeopled forest .
so jackson's island was chosen .
who were to be the subjects of their piracies was a matter that did not occur to them .
then they hunted up huckleberry finn , and he joined them promptly , for all careers were one to him .
he was indifferent .
they presently separated to meet at a lonely spot on the
river-bank two miles above the village at the favorite hour .
which was midnight .
there was a small log raft there which they meant to capture .
each would bring hooks and lines .
and such provision as he could steal in the most dark and mysterious way .
as became outlaws .
and before the afternoon was done .
they had all managed to enjoy the sweet glory of spreading the
fact that pretty soon the town would `` hear something . ''
all who got this vague hint were cautioned to `` be mum and wait . ''
about midnight tom arrived with a boiled ham and a few trifles .
and stopped in a dense undergrowth on a small bluff overlooking the meeting-place .
it was starlight , and very still .
the mighty river lay like an ocean at rest .
tom listened a moment , but no sound disturbed the quiet .
then he gave a low , distinct whistle .
it was answered from under the bluff .
tom whistled twice more .
these signals were answered in the same way .
then a guarded voice said : `` who goes there ? ''
`` tom sawyer , the black avenger of the spanish main .
name your names . ''
`` huck finn the red-handed , and joe harper the terror of the seas . ''
tom had furnished these titles , from his favorite literature .
`` 't is well .
give the countersign . ''
two hoarse whispers delivered the same awful word simultaneously to the brooding night : `` blood ! ''
then tom tumbled his ham over the bluff and let himself down after it .
tearing both skin and clothes to some extent in the effort .
there was an easy .
comfortable path along the shore under the bluff .
but it lacked the advantages of difficulty and danger so valued by a pirate .
the terror of the seas had brought a side of bacon .
and had about worn himself out with getting it there .
finn the red-handed had stolen a skillet and a quantity of half-cured leaf tobacco .
and had also brought a few corn-cobs to make pipes with .
but none of the pirates smoked or '' chewed '' but himself .
the black avenger of the spanish main said it would never do to start without some fire .
that was a wise thought .
matches were hardly known there in that day .
they saw a fire smouldering upon a great raft a hundred yards above .
and they went stealthily thither and helped themselves to a chunk .
they made an imposing adventure of it , saying , `` hist ! ''
every now and then , and suddenly halting with finger on lip .
moving with hands on imaginary dagger-hilts .
and giving orders in dismal whispers that if `` the foe '' stirred .
to `` let him have it to the hilt , '' because `` dead men tell no tales . ''
they knew well enough that the raftsmen were all down at the village laying in stores or having a spree .
but still that was no excuse for their conducting this thing in an unpiratical way .
they shoved off , presently , tom in command , huck at the after oar and joe at the forward .
tom stood amidships .
gloomy-browed .
and with folded arms .
and gave his orders in a low .
stern whisper : `` luff , and bring her to the wind ! ''
`` aye-aye , sir ! ''
`` steady , steady-y-y-y ! ''
`` steady it is , sir ! ''
`` let her go off a point ! ''
`` point it is , sir ! ''
as the boys steadily and monotonously drove the raft toward mid-stream it was
no doubt understood that these orders were given only for '' style .
'' and were not intended to mean anything in particular .
`` what sail 's she carrying ? ''
`` courses , tops'ls , and flying-jib , sir . ''
`` send the r'yals up !
lay out aloft , there , half a dozen of ye .
foretopmaststuns ' l !
lively , now ! ''
`` aye-aye , sir ! ''
`` shake out that maintogalans ' l !
sheets and braces !
now my hearties ! ''
`` aye-aye , sir ! ''
`` hellum-a-lee .
hard a port !
stand by to meet her when she comes !
port , port !
now , men !
with a will !
stead-y-y-y ! ''
`` steady it is , sir ! ''
the raft drew beyond the middle of the river .
the boys pointed her head right , and then lay on their oars .
the river was not high , so there was not more than a two or three mile current .
hardly a word was said during the next three-quarters of an hour .
now the raft was passing before the distant town .
two or three glimmering lights showed where it lay .
peacefully sleeping , beyond the vague vast sweep of star-gemmed water , unconscious of the tremendous event that was happening .
the black avenger stood still with folded arms .
`` looking his last '' upon the scene of his former joys and his later sufferings .
and wishing `` she '' could see him now .
abroad on the wild sea .
facing peril and death with dauntless heart , going to his doom with a grim smile on his lips .
it was but a small strain on his imagination to remove jackson 's island beyond eye-shot of the village .
and so he `` looked his last '' with a broken and satisfied heart .
the other pirates were looking their last , too .
and they all looked so long that they came near letting
the current drift them out of the range of the island .
but they discovered the danger in time , and made shift to avert it .
about two o'clock in the morning the raft grounded on the
bar two hundred yards above the head of the island .
and they waded back and forth until they had landed their freight .
part of the little raft 's belongings consisted of an old sail .
and this they spread over a nook in the bushes for a tent to shelter their provisions .
but they themselves would sleep in the open air in good weather , as became outlaws .
they built a fire against the side of a great log
twenty or thirty steps within the sombre depths of the forest .
and then cooked some bacon in the frying-pan for supper .
and used up half of the corn `` pone '' stock they had brought .
it seemed glorious sport to be feasting in that wild .
free way in the virgin forest of an unexplored and uninhabited island .
far from the haunts of men , and they said they never would return to civilization .
the climbing fire lit up their faces and threw its ruddy glare upon the pillared tree-trunks of their forest temple .
and upon the varnished foliage and festooning vines .
when the last crisp slice of bacon was gone .
and the last allowance of corn pone devoured .
the boys stretched themselves out on the grass , filled with contentment .
they could have found a cooler place .
but they would not deny themselves such a romantic feature as the roasting campfire .
`` ai n't it gay ? ''
said joe .
`` it 's nuts ! ''
said tom .
`` what would the boys say if they could see us ? ''
`` say ?
well , they 'd just die to be here .
hey , hucky ! ''
`` i reckon so , '' said huckleberry .
`` anyways , i 'm suited .
i do n't want nothing better ' n this .
i do n't ever get enough to eat , gen'ally .
and here they ca n't come and pick at a feller and bullyrag him so . ''
`` it 's just the life for me , '' said tom .
`` you do n't have to get up .
mornings , and you do n't have to go to school , and wash , and all that blame foolishness .
you see a pirate do n't have to do anything .
joe .
when he 's ashore .
but a hermit he has to be praying considerable .
and then he do n't have any fun , anyway , all by himself that way . ''
`` oh yes .
that 's so , '' said joe , `` but i had n't thought much about it , you know .
i 'd a good deal rather be a pirate , now that i 've tried it . ''
`` you see .
'' said tom .
`` people do n't go much on hermits .
nowadays , like they used to in old times , but a pirate 's always respected .
and a hermit 's got to sleep on the hardest place he can find .
and put sackcloth and ashes on his head , and stand out in the rain , and. ``
`` what does he put sackcloth and ashes on his head for ? ''
inquired huck .
`` i dono .
but they 've got to do it .
hermits always do .
you 'd have to do that if you was a hermit . ''
`` dern 'd if i would , '' said huck .
`` well , what would you do ? ''
`` i dono .
but i would n't do that . ''
`` why , huck , you 'd have to .
how 'd you get around it ? ''
`` why , i just would n't stand it .
i 'd run away . ''
`` run away !
well , you would be a nice old slouch of a hermit .
you 'd be a disgrace . ''
the red-handed made no response , being better employed .
he had finished gouging out a cob .
and now he fitted a weed stem to it .
loaded it with tobacco , and was pressing a coal to the charge and blowing a cloud of fragrant smoke .
he was in the full bloom of luxurious contentment .
the other pirates envied him this majestic vice , and secretly resolved to acquire it shortly .
presently huck said : `` what does pirates have to do ? ''
tom said : `` oh , they have just a bully time .
take ships and burn them .
and get the money and bury it in awful places in
their island where there 's ghosts and things to watch it .
and kill everybody in the ships .
make 'em walk a plank . ''
`` and they carry the women to the island , '' said joe .
`` they do n't kill the women . ''
`` no , '' assented tom , `` they do n't kill the women .
they 're too noble .
and the women 's always beautiful , too .
`` and do n't they wear the bulliest clothes !
oh no !
all gold and silver and di'monds , '' said joe , with enthusiasm .
`` who ? ''
said huck .
`` why , the pirates . ''
huck scanned his own clothing forlornly .
`` i reckon i ai n't dressed fitten for a pirate .
'' said he , with a regretful pathos in his voice .
`` but i ai n't got none but these . ''
but the other boys told him the fine clothes would come fast enough .
after they should have begun their adventures .
they made him understand that his poor rags would do to begin with .
though it was customary for wealthy pirates to start with a proper wardrobe .
gradually their talk died out and drowsiness began to steal upon the eyelids of the little waifs .
the pipe dropped from the fingers of the red-handed .
and he slept the sleep of the conscience-free and the weary .
the terror of the seas and the black avenger of the spanish main had more difficulty in getting to sleep .
they said their prayers inwardly .
and lying down , since there was nobody there with authority to make them kneel and recite aloud .
in truth .
they had a mind not to say them at all .
but they were afraid to proceed to such lengths as that .
lest they might call down a sudden and special thunderbolt from heaven .
then at once they reached and hovered upon the imminent verge of sleep .
but an intruder came , now , that would not `` down . ''
it was conscience .
they began to feel a vague fear that they had been doing wrong to run away .
and next they thought of the stolen meat , and then the real torture came .
they tried to argue it away by reminding conscience that they had purloined sweetmeats and apples scores of times .
but conscience was not to be appeased by such thin plausibilities .
it seemed to them .
in the end .
that there was no getting around the stubborn fact that taking sweetmeats was only `` hooking .
'' while taking bacon and hams and such valuables was plain simple stealing .
and there was a command against that in the bible .
so they inwardly resolved that so long as they remained in the business .
their piracies should not again be sullied with the crime of stealing .
then conscience granted a truce , and these curiously inconsistent pirates fell peacefully to sleep .
when tom awoke in the morning , he wondered where he was .
he sat up and rubbed his eyes and looked around .
then he comprehended .
it was the cool gray dawn .
and there was a delicious sense of repose and peace in the deep pervading calm and silence of the woods .
not a leaf stirred .
not a sound obtruded upon great nature 's meditation .
beaded dewdrops stood upon the leaves and grasses .
a white layer of ashes covered the fire .
and a thin blue breath of smoke rose straight into the air .
joe and huck still slept .
now , far away in the woods a bird called .
another answered .
presently the hammering of a woodpecker was heard .
gradually the cool dim gray of the morning whitened , and as gradually sounds multiplied and life manifested itself .
the marvel of nature shaking off sleep and going to work unfolded itself to the musing boy .
a little green worm came crawling over a dewy leaf .
lifting two-thirds of his body into the air from time to time and `` sniffing around .
'' then proceeding again .
for he was measuring , tom said .
and when the worm approached him .
of its own accord .
he sat as still as a stone .
with his hopes rising and falling .
by turns , as the creature still came toward him or seemed inclined to go elsewhere .
and when at last it considered a painful moment with its curved body in the air
and then came decisively down upon tom 's leg and began a journey over him .
his whole heart was glad .
for that meant that he was going to have a new suit of clothes .
without the shadow of a doubt a gaudy piratical uniform .
now a procession of ants appeared , from nowhere in particular , and went about their labors .
one struggled manfully by with a dead spider five times as big as itself in its arms .
and lugged it straight up a tree-trunk .
a brown spotted lady-bug climbed the dizzy height of a grass blade .
and tom bent down close to it and said .
`` lady-bug .
lady-bug .
fly away home .
your house is on fire .
your children 's alone , '' and she took wing and went off to see about it .
which did not surprise the boy .
for he knew of old that this insect was credulous about conflagrations .
and he had practised upon its simplicity more than once .
a tumblebug came next .
heaving sturdily at its ball .
and tom touched the creature , to see it shut its legs against its body and pretend to be dead .
the birds were fairly rioting by this time .
a catbird .
the northern mocker .
lit in a tree over tom 's head .
and trilled out her imitations of her neighbors in a rapture of enjoyment .
then a shrill jay swept down .
a flash of blue flame .
and stopped on a twig almost within the boy 's reach .
cocked his head to one side and eyed the strangers with a consuming curiosity .
a gray squirrel and a big fellow of the `` fox '' kind came skurrying along .
sitting up at intervals to inspect and chatter at the boys .
for the wild things had probably never seen a human being
before and scarcely knew whether to be afraid or not .
all nature was wide awake and stirring , now .
long lances of sunlight pierced down through the dense foliage far and near .
and a few butterflies came fluttering upon the scene .
tom stirred up the other pirates and they all clattered away with a shout .
and in a minute or two were stripped and chasing after and tumbling
over each other in the shallow limpid water of the white sandbar .
they felt no longing for the little village sleeping in the distance beyond the majestic waste of water .
a vagrant current or a slight rise in the river had carried off their raft .
but this only gratified them , since its going was something like burning the bridge between them and civilization .
they came back to camp wonderfully refreshed , glad-hearted , and ravenous .
and they soon had the camp-fire blazing up again .
huck found a spring of clear cold water close by .
and the boys made cups of broad oak or hickory leaves .
and felt that water .
sweetened with such a wildwood charm as that , would be a good enough substitute for coffee .
while joe was slicing bacon for breakfast , tom and huck asked him to hold on a minute .
they stepped to a promising nook in the river-bank and threw in their lines .
almost immediately they had reward .
joe had not had time to get impatient before they were back again with some handsome bass .
a couple of sun-perch and a small catfish .
provisions enough for quite a family .
they fried the fish with the bacon , and were astonished .
for no fish had ever seemed so delicious before .
they did not know that the quicker a fresh-water fish is
on the fire after he is caught the better he is .
and they reflected little upon what a sauce open-air sleeping .
open-air exercise , bathing , and a large ingredient of hunger make , too .
they lay around in the shade .
after breakfast , while huck had a smoke , and then went off through the woods on an exploring expedition .
they tramped gayly along .
over decaying logs .
through tangled underbrush .
among solemn monarchs of the forest , hung from their crowns to the ground with a drooping regalia of grape-vines .
now and then they came upon snug nooks carpeted with grass and jeweled with flowers .
they found plenty of things to be delighted with , but nothing to be astonished at .
they discovered that the island was about three miles long and a quarter of a mile wide .
and that the shore it lay closest to was only separated
from it by a narrow channel hardly two hundred yards wide .
they took a swim about every hour .
so it was close upon the middle of the afternoon when they got back to camp .
they were too hungry to stop to fish .
but they fared sumptuously upon cold ham , and then threw themselves down in the shade to talk .
but the talk soon began to drag , and then died .
the stillness .
the solemnity that brooded in the woods .
and the sense of loneliness , began to tell upon the spirits of the boys .
they fell to thinking .
a sort of undefined longing crept upon them .
this took dim shape , presently .
it was budding homesickness .
even finn the red-handed was dreaming of his doorsteps and empty hogsheads .
but they were all ashamed of their weakness , and none was brave enough to speak his thought .
for some time .
now .
the boys had been dully conscious of a peculiar sound in the distance .
just as one sometimes is of the ticking of a clock which he takes no distinct note of .
but now this mysterious sound became more pronounced , and forced a recognition .
the boys started , glanced at each other , and then each assumed a listening attitude .
there was a long silence , profound and unbroken .
then a deep , sullen boom came floating down out of the distance .
`` what is it ! ''
exclaimed joe , under his breath .
`` i wonder , '' said tom in a whisper .
`` 'tai n't thunder , '' said huckleberry , in an awed tone , `` becuz thunder. ``
`` hark ! ''
said tom .
`` listen .
do n't talk . ''
they waited a time that seemed an age , and then the same muffled boom troubled the solemn hush .
`` let 's go and see . ''
they sprang to their feet and hurried to the shore toward the town .
they parted the bushes on the bank and peered out over the water .
the little steam ferry-boat was about a mile below the village , drifting with the current .
her broad deck seemed crowded with people .
there were a great many skiffs rowing about or floating with the stream in the neighborhood of the ferryboat .
but the boys could not determine what the men in them were doing .
presently a great jet of white smoke burst from the ferryboat 's side .
and as it expanded and rose in a lazy cloud .
that same dull throb of sound was borne to the listeners again .
`` i know now ! ''
exclaimed tom .
`` somebody 's drownded ! ''
`` that 's it ! ''
said huck .
`` they done that last summer , when bill turner got drownded .
they shoot a cannon over the water , and that makes him come up to the top .
yes .
and they take loaves of bread and put quicksilver in 'em and set 'em afloat .
and wherever there 's anybody that 's drownded , they 'll float right there and stop . ''
`` yes , i 've heard about that , '' said joe .
`` i wonder what makes the bread do that . ''
`` oh , it ai n't the bread , so much , '' said tom .
`` i reckon it 's mostly what they say over it before they start it out . ''
`` but they do n't say anything over it , '' said huck .
`` i 've seen 'em and they do n't . ''
`` well , that 's funny , '' said tom .
`` but maybe they say it to themselves .
of course they do .
anybody might know that . ''
the other boys agreed that there was reason in what tom said .
because an ignorant lump of bread .
uninstructed by an incantation .
could not be expected to act very intelligently when set upon an errand of such gravity .
`` by jings , i wish i was over there , now , '' said joe .
`` i do too '' said huck `` i 'd give heaps to know who it is . ''
the boys still listened and watched .
presently a revealing thought flashed through tom 's mind .
and he exclaimed : `` boys , i know who 's drownded .
it 's us ! ''
they felt like heroes in an instant .
here was a gorgeous triumph .
they were missed .
they were mourned .
hearts were breaking on their account .
tears were being shed .
accusing memories of unkindness to these poor lost lads were rising up .
and unavailing regrets and remorse were being indulged .
and best of all .
the departed were the talk of the whole town .
and the envy of all the boys , as far as this dazzling notoriety was concerned .
this was fine .
it was worth while to be a pirate , after all .
as twilight drew on , the ferryboat went back to her accustomed business and the skiffs disappeared .
the pirates returned to camp .
they were jubilant with vanity over their new grandeur and the illustrious trouble they were making .
they caught fish .
cooked supper and ate it .
and then fell to guessing at what the village was thinking and saying about them .
and the pictures they drew of the public distress on their account were gratifying to look upon .
from their point of view .
but when the shadows of night closed them in .
they gradually ceased to talk , and sat gazing into the fire , with their minds evidently wandering elsewhere .
the excitement was gone .
now .
and tom and joe could not keep back thoughts of certain persons at
home who were not enjoying this fine frolic as much as they were .
misgivings came .
they grew troubled and unhappy .
a sigh or two escaped , unawares .
by and by joe timidly ventured upon a roundabout `` feeler ''
as to how the others might look upon a return to civilization .
not right now , but .
tom withered him with derision !
huck .
being uncommitted as yet .
joined in with tom .
and the waverer quickly `` explained .
'' and was glad to get out of the scrape with as
little taint of chicken-hearted home-sickness clinging to his garments as he could .
mutiny was effectually laid to rest for the moment .
as the night deepened , huck began to nod , and presently to snore .
joe followed next .
tom lay upon his elbow motionless , for some time , watching the two intently .
at last he got up cautiously .
on his knees , and went searching among the grass and the flickering reflections flung by the campfire .
he picked up and inspected several large semi-cylinders of the thin white bark of a sycamore .
and finally chose two which seemed to suit him .
then he knelt by the fire and painfully wrote something upon each of these with his `` red keel '' .
one he rolled up and put in his jacket pocket .
and the other he put in joe 's hat and removed it to a little distance from the owner .
and he also put into the hat certain schoolboy treasures of almost inestimable value .
among them a lump of chalk .
an india-rubber ball .
three fishhooks , and one of that kind of marbles known as a `` sure 'nough crystal . ''
then he tiptoed his way cautiously among the trees till he felt that he was out of hearing .
and straightway broke into a keen run in the direction of the sandbar .
a few minutes later tom was in the shoal water of the bar , wading toward the illinois shore .
before the depth reached his middle he was halfway over .
the current would permit no more wading .
now , so he struck out confidently to swim the remaining hundred yards .
he swam quartering upstream , but still was swept downward rather faster than he had expected .
however .
he reached the shore finally , and drifted along till he found a low place and drew himself out .
he put his hand on his jacket pocket .
found his piece of bark safe .
and then struck through the woods , following the shore , with streaming garments .
shortly before ten o'clock he came out into an open place opposite the village .
and saw the ferryboat lying in the shadow of the trees and the high bank .
everything was quiet under the blinking stars .
he crept down the bank .
watching with all his eyes .
slipped into the water .
swam three or four strokes and climbed into the skiff that
did `` yawl '' duty at the boat 's stern .
he laid himself down under the thwarts and waited , panting .
presently the cracked bell tapped and a voice gave the order to `` cast off . ''
a minute or two later the skiff 's head was standing high up .
against the boat 's swell , and the voyage was begun .
tom felt happy in his success , for he knew it was the boat 's last trip for the night .
at the end of a long twelve or fifteen minutes the wheels stopped .
and tom slipped overboard and swam ashore in the dusk .
landing fifty yards downstream , out of danger of possible stragglers .
he flew along unfrequented alleys , and shortly found himself at his aunt 's back fence .
he climbed over .
approached the `` ell , '' and looked in at the sitting-room window , for a light was burning there .
there sat aunt polly , sid , mary , and joe harper 's mother , grouped together , talking .
they were by the bed , and the bed was between them and the door .
tom went to the door and began to softly lift the latch .
then he pressed gently and the door yielded a crack .
he continued pushing cautiously .
and quaking every time it creaked , till he judged he might squeeze through on his knees .
so he put his head through and began , warily .
`` what makes the candle blow so ? ''
said aunt polly .
tom hurried up .
`` why , that door 's open , i believe .
why , of course it is .
no end of strange things now .
go 'long and shut it , sid . ''
tom disappeared under the bed just in time .
he lay and `` breathed '' himself for a time .
and then crept to where he could almost touch his aunt 's foot .
`` but as i was saying .
'' said aunt polly , `` he war n't bad , so to say .
only mischeevous .
only just giddy , and harum-scarum , you know .
he warn't any more responsible than a colt .
he never meant any harm , and he was the best-hearted boy that ever was '' .
and she began to cry .
`` it was just so with my joe .
always full of his devilment .
and up to every kind of mischief , but he was just as unselfish and kind as he could be .
and laws bless me .
to think i went and whipped him for taking that cream .
never once recollecting that i throwed it out myself because it was sour .
and i never to see him again in this world .
never , never , never , poor abused boy ! ''
and mrs. harper sobbed as if her heart would break .
`` i hope tom 's better off where he is .
'' said sid , `` but if he 'd been better in some ways. ``
`` sid ! ''
tom felt the glare of the old lady 's eye , though he could not see it .
`` not a word against my tom , now that he 's gone !
god 'll take care of him .
never you trouble yourself , sir !
oh , mrs. harper , i don't know how to give him up !
i do n't know how to give him up !
he was such a comfort to me , although he tormented my old heart out of me , 'most . ''
`` the lord giveth and the lord hath taken away .
blessed be the name of the lord !
but it 's so hard .
oh , it 's so hard !
only last saturday my joe busted a firecracker right under my nose and i knocked him sprawling .
little did i know then , how soon .
oh , if it was to do over again i 'd hug him and bless him for it . ''
`` yes .
yes .
yes , i know just how you feel , mrs. harper , i know just exactly how you feel .
no longer ago than yesterday noon .
my tom took and filled the cat full of pain-killer .
and i did think the cretur would tear the house down .
and god forgive me , i cracked tom 's head with my thimble , poor boy , poor dead boy .
but he 's out of all his troubles now .
and the last words i ever heard him say was to reproach. ``
but this memory was too much for the old lady , and she broke entirely down .
tom was snuffling , now , himself .
and more in pity of himself than anybody else .
he could hear mary crying , and putting in a kindly word for him from time to time .
he began to have a nobler opinion of himself than ever before .
still .
he was sufficiently touched by his aunt 's grief to long to
rush out from under the bed and overwhelm her with joy .
and the theatrical gorgeousness of the thing appealed strongly to his nature .
too , but he resisted and lay still .
he went on listening .
and gathered by odds and ends that it was conjectured at
first that the boys had got drowned while taking a swim .
then the small raft had been missed .
next , certain boys said the missing lads had promised that the village should `` hear something '' soon .
the wise-heads had `` put this and that together '' and decided that the lads
had gone off on that raft and would turn up at the next town below .
presently .
but toward noon the raft had been found .
lodged against the missouri shore some five or six miles below the village .
and then hope perished .
they must be drowned , else hunger would have driven them home by nightfall if not sooner .
it was believed that the search for the bodies had been a
fruitless effort merely because the drowning must have occurred in mid-channel .
since the boys , being good swimmers , would otherwise have escaped to shore .
this was wednesday night .
if the bodies continued missing until sunday .
all hope would be given over , and the funerals would be preached on that morning .
tom shuddered .
mrs. harper gave a sobbing goodnight and turned to go .
then with a mutual impulse the two bereaved women flung themselves into each other's arms and had a good .
consoling cry , and then parted .
aunt polly was tender far beyond her wont , in her goodnight to sid and mary .
sid snuffled a bit and mary went off crying with all her heart .
aunt polly knelt down and prayed for tom so touchingly .
so appealingly .
and with such measureless love in her words and her old trembling voice .
that he was weltering in tears again , long before she was through .
he had to keep still long after she went to bed .
for she kept making broken-hearted ejaculations from time to time , tossing unrestfully , and turning over .
but at last she was still , only moaning a little in her sleep .
now the boy stole out .
rose gradually by the bedside , shaded the candle-light with his hand , and stood regarding her .
his heart was full of pity for her .
he took out his sycamore scroll and placed it by the candle .
but something occurred to him , and he lingered considering .
his face lighted with a happy solution of his thought .
he put the bark hastily in his pocket .
then he bent over and kissed the faded lips .
and straightway made his stealthy exit , latching the door behind him .
he threaded his way back to the ferry landing .
found nobody at large there .
and walked boldly on board the boat .
for he knew she was tenantless except that there was a watchman .
who always turned in and slept like a graven image .
he untied the skiff at the stern , slipped into it , and was soon rowing cautiously upstream .
when he had pulled a mile above the village .
he started quartering across and bent himself stoutly to his work .
he hit the landing on the other side neatly , for this was a familiar bit of work to him .
he was moved to capture the skiff .
arguing that it might be considered a ship and therefore legitimate prey for a pirate .
but he knew a thorough search would be made for it and that might end in revelations .
so he stepped ashore and entered the woods .
he sat down and took a long rest .
torturing himself meanwhile to keep awake , and then started warily down the home-stretch .
the night was far spent .
it was broad daylight before he found himself fairly abreast the island bar .
he rested again until the sun was well up and gilding the great river with its splendor .
and then he plunged into the stream .
a little later he paused .
dripping .
upon the threshold of the camp .
and heard joe say : `` no , tom 's true-blue , huck , and he 'll come back .
he wo n't desert .
he knows that would be a disgrace to a pirate .
and tom 's too proud for that sort of thing .
he 's up to something or other .
now i wonder what ? ''
`` well , the things is ours , anyway , ai n't they ? ''
`` pretty near , but not yet , huck .
the writing says they are if he ain't back here to breakfast . ''
`` which he is ! ''
exclaimed tom , with fine dramatic effect , stepping grandly into camp .
a sumptuous breakfast of bacon and fish was shortly provided .
and as the boys set to work upon it , tom recounted ( and adorned ) his adventures .
they were a vain and boastful company of heroes when the tale was done .
then tom hid himself away in a shady nook to sleep till noon .
and the other pirates got ready to fish and explore .
after dinner all the gang turned out to hunt for turtle eggs on the bar .
they went about poking sticks into the sand .
and when they found a soft place they went down on their knees and dug with their hands .
sometimes they would take fifty or sixty eggs out of one hole .
they were perfectly round white things a trifle smaller than an english walnut .
they had a famous fried-egg feast that night , and another on friday morning .
after breakfast they went whooping and prancing out on the bar .
and chased each other round and round .
shedding clothes as they went .
until they were naked .
and then continued the frolic far away up the shoal water of the bar .
against the stiff current .
which latter tripped their legs from under them from time to time and greatly increased the fun .
and now and then they stooped in a group and splashed water in each other 's faces with their palms .
gradually approaching each other .
with averted faces to avoid the strangling sprays .
and finally gripping and struggling till the best man ducked his neighbor .
and then they all went under in a tangle of white legs and arms and came up blowing .
sputtering , laughing , and gasping for breath at one and the same time .
when they were well exhausted .
they would run out and sprawl on the dry .
hot sand .
and lie there and cover themselves up with it .
and by and by break for the water again and go through the original performance once more .
finally it occurred to them that their naked skin represented flesh-colored `` tights '' very fairly .
so they drew a ring in the sand and had a circus .
with three clowns in it , for none would yield this proudest post to his neighbor .
next they got their marbles and played `` knucks '' and ``
ringtaw '' and '' keeps '' till that amusement grew stale .
then joe and huck had another swim .
but tom would not venture .
because he found that in kicking off his trousers he had kicked his string of rattlesnake rattles off his ankle .
and he wondered how he had escaped cramp so long without the protection of this mysterious charm .
he did not venture again until he had found it .
and by that time the other boys were tired and ready to rest .
they gradually wandered apart .
dropped into the `` dumps .
'' and fell to gazing longingly across the wide river to where the village lay drowsing in the sun .
tom found himself writing `` becky '' in the sand with his big toe .
he scratched it out , and was angry with himself for his weakness .
but he wrote it again , nevertheless .
he could not help it .
he erased it once more and then took himself out of
temptation by driving the other boys together and joining them .
but joe 's spirits had gone down almost beyond resurrection .
he was so homesick that he could hardly endure the misery of it .
the tears lay very near the surface .
huck was melancholy , too .
tom was downhearted , but tried hard not to show it .
he had a secret which he was not ready to tell .
yet , but if this mutinous depression was not broken up soon , he would have to bring it out .
he said .
with a great show of cheerfulness : `` i bet there 's been pirates on this island before , boys .
we 'll explore it again .
they 've hid treasures here somewhere .
how 'd you feel to light on a rotten chest full of gold and silver .
hey ? ''
but it roused only faint enthusiasm , which faded out , with no reply .
tom tried one or two other seductions .
but they failed , too .
it was discouraging work .
joe sat poking up the sand with a stick and looking very gloomy .
finally he said : `` oh , boys , let 's give it up .
i want to go home .
it 's so lonesome . ''
`` oh no , joe , you 'll feel better by and by , '' said tom .
`` just think of the fishing that 's here . ''
`` i do n't care for fishing .
i want to go home . ''
`` but , joe , there ai n't such another swimming-place anywhere . ''
`` swimming 's no good .
i do n't seem to care for it .
somehow , when there ai n't anybody to say i sha ' n't go in .
i mean to go home . ''
`` oh , shucks !
baby !
you want to see your mother , i reckon . ''
`` yes , i do want to see my mother .
and you would , too , if you had one .
i ai n't any more baby than you are . ''
and joe snuffled a little .
`` well , we 'll let the crybaby go home to his mother , wo n't we , huck ?
poor thing .
does it want to see its mother ?
and so it shall .
you like it here , do n't you , huck ?
we 'll stay , wo n't we ? ''
huck said , `` y-e-s '' .
without any heart in it .
`` i 'll never speak to you again as long as i live , '' said joe , rising .
`` there now ! ''
and he moved moodily away and began to dress himself .
`` who cares ! ''
said tom .
`` nobody wants you to .
go 'long home and get laughed at .
oh , you 're a nice pirate .
huck and me ai n't crybabies .
we'll stay , wo n't we , huck ?
let him go if he wants to .
i reckon we can get along without him , per'aps . ''
but tom was uneasy , nevertheless , and was alarmed to see joe go sullenly on with his dressing .
and then it was discomforting to see huck eying joe 's preparations so wistfully .
and keeping up such an ominous silence .
presently , without a parting word , joe began to wade off toward the illinois shore .
tom 's heart began to sink .
he glanced at huck .
huck could not bear the look , and dropped his eyes .
then he said : `` i want to go , too , tom .
it was getting so lonesome anyway , and now it 'll be worse .
let 's us go , too , tom . ''
`` i wo n't !
you can all go , if you want to .
i mean to stay . ''
`` tom , i better go . ''
`` well , go 'long .
who 's hendering you . ''
huck began to pick up his scattered clothes .
he said : `` tom , i wisht you 'd come , too .
now you think it over .
we 'll wait for you when we get to shore . ''
`` well , you 'll wait a blame long time , that 's all . ''
huck started sorrowfully away .
and tom stood looking after him .
with a strong desire tugging at his heart to yield his pride and go along too .
he hoped the boys would stop , but they still waded slowly on .
it suddenly dawned on tom that it was become very lonely and still .
he made one final struggle with his pride , and then darted after his comrades , yelling : `` wait !
wait !
i want to tell you something ! ''
they presently stopped and turned around .
when he got to where they were .
he began unfolding his secret .
and they listened moodily till at last they saw the `` point '' he was driving at .
and then they set up a warwhoop of applause and said it was `` splendid ! ''
and said if he had told them at first , they would n't have started away .
he made a plausible excuse .
but his real reason had been the fear that not even the
secret would keep them with him any very great length of time .
and so he had meant to hold it in reserve as a last seduction .
the lads came gayly back and went at their sports again with a will .
chattering all the time about tom 's stupendous plan and admiring the genius of it .
after a dainty egg and fish dinner , tom said he wanted to learn to smoke , now .
joe caught at the idea and said he would like to try , too .
so huck made pipes and filled them .
these novices had never smoked anything before but cigars made of grapevine .
and they `` bit '' the tongue , and were not considered manly anyway .
now they stretched themselves out on their elbows and began to puff , charily , and with slender confidence .
the smoke had an unpleasant taste .
and they gagged a little , but tom said : `` why , it 's just as easy !
if i 'd a knowed this was all , i 'd a learnt long ago . ''
`` so would i , '' said joe .
`` it 's just nothing . ''
`` why .
many a time i 've looked at people smoking , and thought well i wish i could do that .
but i never thought i could , '' said tom .
`` that 's just the way with me , hai n't it , huck ?
you 've heard me talk just that way .
have n't you , huck ?
i 'll leave it to huck if i have n't . ''
`` yes .
heaps of times , '' said huck .
`` well , i have too , '' said tom .
`` oh , hundreds of times .
once down by the slaughter-house .
do n't you remember , huck ?
bob tanner was there , and johnny miller , and jeff thatcher , when i said it .
do n't you remember , huck , 'bout me saying that ? ''
`` yes , that 's so , '' said huck .
`` that was the day after i lost a white alley .
no , 't was the day before . ''
`` there .
i told you so , '' said tom .
`` huck recollects it . ''
`` i bleeve i could smoke this pipe all day , '' said joe .
`` i do n't feel sick . ''
`` neither do i , '' said tom .
`` i could smoke it all day .
but i bet you jeff thatcher could n't . ''
`` jeff thatcher !
why , he 'd keel over just with two draws .
just let him try it once .
he 'd see ! ''
`` i bet he would .
and johnny miller .
i wish could see johnny miller tackle it once . ''
`` oh , do n't i ! ''
said joe .
`` why , i bet you johnny miller could n't any more do this than nothing .
just one little snifter would fetch him . ''
`` 'deed it would , joe .
say .
i wish the boys could see us now . ''
`` so do i . ''
`` say .
boys .
do n't say anything about it .
and some time when they're around .
i 'll come up to you and say , 'joe , got a pipe ?
i want a smoke . '
and you 'll say .
kind of careless like .
as if it war n't anything .
you'll say .
'yes , i got my old pipe , and another one , but my tobacker ain't very good . '
and i 'll say , 'oh , that 's all right , if it 's strong enough . '
and then you 'll out with the pipes .
and we 'll light up just as ca 'm , and then just see 'em look ! ''
`` by jings , that 'll be gay , tom !
i wish it was now ! ''
`` so do i !
and when we tell 'em we learned when we was off pirating .
wo n't they wish they 'd been along ? ''
`` oh , i reckon not !
i 'll just bet they will ! ''
so the talk ran on .
but presently it began to flag a trifle , and grow disjointed .
the silences widened .
the expectoration marvellously increased .
every pore inside the boys ' cheeks became a spouting fountain .
they could scarcely bail out the cellars under their tongues fast enough to prevent an inundation .
little overflowings down their throats occurred in spite of all they could do , and sudden retchings followed every time .
both boys were looking very pale and miserable , now .
joe 's pipe dropped from his nerveless fingers .
tom 's followed .
both fountains were going furiously and both pumps bailing with might and main .
joe said feebly : `` i 've lost my knife .
i reckon i better go and find it . ''
tom said , with quivering lips and halting utterance : `` i 'll help you .
you go over that way and i 'll hunt around by the spring .
no , you need n't come , huck .
we can find it . ''
so huck sat down again , and waited an hour .
then he found it lonesome , and went to find his comrades .
they were wide apart in the woods , both very pale , both fast asleep .
but something informed him that if they had had any trouble they had got rid of it .
they were not talkative at supper that night .
they had a humble look .
and when huck prepared his pipe after the meal and was going to prepare theirs .
they said no , they were not feeling very well .
something they ate at dinner had disagreed with them .
about midnight joe awoke , and called the boys .
there was a brooding oppressiveness in the air that seemed to bode something .
the boys huddled themselves together and sought the friendly companionship of the fire .
though the dull dead heat of the breathless atmosphere was stifling .
they sat still , intent and waiting .
the solemn hush continued .
beyond the light of the fire everything was swallowed up in the blackness of darkness .
presently there came a quivering glow that vaguely revealed the foliage for a moment and then vanished .
by and by another came , a little stronger .
then another .
then a faint moan came sighing through the branches of the
forest and the boys felt a fleeting breath upon their cheeks .
and shuddered with the fancy that the spirit of the night had gone by .
there was a pause .
now a weird flash turned night into day and showed every little grassblade .
separate and distinct , that grew about their feet .
and it showed three white , startled faces , too .
a deep peal of thunder went rolling and tumbling down the
heavens and lost itself in sullen rumblings in the distance .
a sweep of chilly air passed by .
rustling all the leaves and snowing the flaky ashes broadcast about the fire .
another fierce glare lit up the forest and an instant crash followed
that seemed to rend the treetops right over the boys ' heads .
they clung together in terror , in the thick gloom that followed .
a few big raindrops fell pattering upon the leaves .
`` quick !
boys , go for the tent ! ''
exclaimed tom .
they sprang away .
stumbling over roots and among vines in the dark , no two plunging in the same direction .
a furious blast roared through the trees , making everything sing as it went .
one blinding flash after another came , and peal on peal of deafening thunder .
and now a drenching rain poured down and the rising hurricane drove it in sheets along the ground .
the boys cried out to each other , but the roaring wind and the booming thunderblasts drowned their voices utterly .
however .
one by one they straggled in at last and took shelter under the tent .
cold , scared , and streaming with water .
but to have company in misery seemed something to be grateful for .
they could not talk .
the old sail flapped so furiously , even if the other noises would have allowed them .
the tempest rose higher and higher .
and presently the sail tore loose from its fastenings and went winging away on the blast .
the boys seized each others ' hands and fled .
with many tumblings and bruises , to the shelter of a great oak that stood upon the riverbank .
now the battle was at its highest .
under the ceaseless conflagration of lightning that flamed in the skies .
everything below stood out in cleancut and shadowless distinctness : the bending trees .
the billowy river .
white with foam .
the driving spray of spumeflakes .
the dim outlines of the high bluffs on the other side .
glimpsed through the drifting cloudrack and the slanting veil of rain .
every little while some giant tree yielded the fight and fell crashing through the younger growth .
and the unflagging thunderpeals came now in ear-splitting explosive bursts , keen and sharp , and unspeakably appalling .
the storm culminated in one matchless effort that seemed likely to tear the island to pieces .
burn it up .
drown it to the treetops .
blow it away , and deafen every creature in it , all at one and the same moment .
it was a wild night for homeless young heads to be out in .
but at last the battle was done .
and the forces retired with weaker and weaker threatenings and grumblings , and peace resumed her sway .
the boys went back to camp , a good deal awed .
but they found there was still something to be thankful for .
because the great sycamore .
the shelter of their beds .
was a ruin .
now , blasted by the lightnings , and they were not under it when the catastrophe happened .
everything in camp was drenched , the campfire as well .
for they were but heedless lads , like their generation , and had made no provision against rain .
here was matter for dismay , for they were soaked through and chilled .
they were eloquent in their distress .
but they presently discovered that the fire had eaten so far up under the great log it
had been built against ( where it curved upward and separated itself from the ground ) .
that a handbreadth or so of it had escaped wetting .
so they patiently wrought until .
with shreds and bark gathered from the under sides of sheltered logs , they coaxed the fire to burn again .
then they piled on great dead boughs till they had a roaring furnace , and were gladhearted once more .
they dried their boiled ham and had a feast .
and after that they sat by the fire and expanded and glorified their midnight adventure until morning .
for there was not a dry spot to sleep on , anywhere around .
as the sun began to steal in upon the boys .
drowsiness came over them , and they went out on the sandbar and lay down to sleep .
they got scorched out by and by , and drearily set about getting breakfast .
after the meal they felt rusty , and stiff-jointed , and a little homesick once more .
tom saw the signs , and fell to cheering up the pirates as well as he could .
but they cared nothing for marbles , or circus , or swimming , or anything .
he reminded them of the imposing secret , and raised a ray of cheer .
while it lasted , he got them interested in a new device .
this was to knock off being pirates , for a while , and be indians for a change .
they were attracted by this idea .
so it was not long before they were stripped .
and striped from head to heel with black mud , like so many zebras .
all of them chiefs , of course .
and then they went tearing through the woods to attack an english settlement .
by and by they separated into three hostile tribes .
and darted upon each other from ambush with dreadful warwhoops , and killed and scalped each other by thousands .
it was a gory day .
consequently it was an extremely satisfactory one .
they assembled in camp toward suppertime , hungry and happy .
but now a difficulty arose .
hostile indians could not break the bread of hospitality together without first making peace .
and this was a simple impossibility without smoking a pipe of peace .
there was no other process that ever they had heard of .
two of the savages almost wished they had remained pirates .
however , there was no other way .
so with such show of cheerfulness as they could muster they
called for the pipe and took their whiff as it passed .
in due form .
and behold , they were glad they had gone into savagery , for they had gained something .
they found that they could now smoke a little without having to go and hunt for a lost knife .
they did not get sick enough to be seriously uncomfortable .
they were not likely to fool away this high promise for lack of effort .
no .
they practised cautiously , after supper , with right fair success , and so they spent a jubilant evening .
they were prouder and happier in their new acquirement than they would
have been in the scalping and skinning of the six nations .
we will leave them to smoke and chatter and brag .
since we have no further use for them at present .
but there was no hilarity in the little town that same tranquil saturday afternoon .
the harpers .
and aunt polly 's family , were being put into mourning , with great grief and many tears .
an unusual quiet possessed the village , although it was ordinarily quiet enough , in all conscience .
the villagers conducted their concerns with an absent air , and talked little .
but they sighed often .
the saturday holiday seemed a burden to the children .
they had no heart in their sports , and gradually gave them up .
in the afternoon becky thatcher found herself moping about the deserted schoolhouse yard , and feeling very melancholy .
but she found nothing there to comfort her .
she soliloquized : `` oh , if i only had a brass andiron-knob again !
but i have n't got anything now to remember him by . ''
and she choked back a little sob .
presently she stopped , and said to herself : `` it was right here .
oh , if it was to do over again , i would n't say that .
i would n't say it for the whole world .
but he 's gone now .
i'll never , never , never see him any more . ''
this thought broke her down , and she wandered away , with tears rolling down her cheeks .
then quite a group of boys and girls .
playmates of tom's and joe 's .
came by .
and stood looking over the paling fence and talking in reverent tones
of how tom did so-and-so the last time they saw him .
and how joe said this and that small trifle ( pregnant with awful prophecy .
as they could easily see now ! ) .
and each speaker pointed out the exact spot where the lost lads stood at the time .
and then added something like `` and i was a-standing just so .
just as i am now , and as if you was him .
i was as close as that .
and he smiled , just this way .
and then something seemed to go all over me , like .
awful , you know .
and i never thought what it meant , of course , but i can see now ! ''
then there was a dispute about who saw the dead boys last in life .
and many claimed that dismal distinction , and offered evidences , more or less tampered with by the witness .
and when it was ultimately decided who did see the departed last .
and exchanged the last words with them .
the lucky parties took upon themselves a sort of sacred importance .
and were gaped at and envied by all the rest .
one poor chap .
who had no other grandeur to offer .
said with tolerably manifest pride in the remembrance : `` well , tom sawyer he licked me once . ''
but that bid for glory was a failure .
most of the boys could say that , and so that cheapened the distinction too much .
the group loitered away , still recalling memories of the lost heroes , in awed voices .
when the sunday-school hour was finished .
the next morning , the bell began to toll , instead of ringing in the usual way .
it was a very still sabbath .
and the mournful sound seemed in keeping with the musing hush that lay upon nature .
the villagers began to gather , loitering a moment in the vestibule to converse in whispers about the sad event .
but there was no whispering in the house .
only the funereal rustling of dresses as the women gathered to their seats disturbed the silence there .
none could remember when the little church had been so full before .
there was finally a waiting pause .
an expectant dumbness .
and then aunt polly entered .
followed by sid and mary .
and they by the harper family .
all in deep black .
and the whole congregation .
the old minister as well , rose reverently and stood until the mourners were seated in the front pew .
there was another communing silence .
broken at intervals by muffled sobs , and then the minister spread his hands abroad and prayed .
a moving hymn was sung , and the text followed : `` i am the resurrection and the life . ''
as the service proceeded .
the clergyman drew such pictures of the graces .
the winning ways .
and the rare promise of the lost lads that every soul there .
thinking he recognized these pictures .
felt a pang in remembering that he had persistently blinded himself to them always before .
and had as persistently seen only faults and flaws in the poor boys .
the minister related many a touching incident in the lives of the departed .
too .
which illustrated their sweet .
generous natures .
and the people could easily see .
now .
how noble and beautiful those episodes were .
and remembered with grief that at the time they occurred they had seemed rank rascalities .
well deserving of the cowhide .
the congregation became more and more moved .
as the pathetic tale went on .
till at last the whole company broke down and joined the weeping mourners in a chorus of anguished sobs .
the preacher himself giving way to his feelings , and crying in the pulpit .
there was a rustle in the gallery , which nobody noticed .
a moment later the church door creaked .
the minister raised his streaming eyes above his handkerchief , and stood transfixed !
first one and then another pair of eyes followed the minister 's .
and then almost with one impulse the congregation rose and stared
while the three dead boys came marching up the aisle .
tom in the lead .
joe next , and huck , a ruin of drooping rags , sneaking sheepishly in the rear !
they had been hid in the unused gallery listening to their own funeral sermon !
aunt polly .
mary .
and the harpers threw themselves upon their restored ones .
smothered them with kisses and poured out thanksgivings .
while poor huck stood abashed and uncomfortable .
not knowing exactly what to do or where to hide from so many unwelcoming eyes .
he wavered .
and started to slink away .
but tom seized him and said : `` aunt polly , it ai n't fair .
somebody 's got to be glad to see huck . ''
`` and so they shall .
i 'm glad to see him , poor motherless thing ! ''
and the loving attentions aunt polly lavished upon him were the one
thing capable of making him more uncomfortable than he was before .
suddenly the minister shouted at the top of his voice : `` praise god from whom all blessings flow .
sing ! .
and put your hearts in it ! ''
and they did .
old hundred swelled up with a triumphant burst .
and while it shook the rafters tom sawyer the pirate looked around upon the envying juveniles
about him and confessed in his heart that this was the proudest moment of his life .
as the `` sold '' congregation trooped out they said they would almost be willing
to be made ridiculous again to hear old hundred sung like that once more .
tom got more cuffs and kisses that day .
according to aunt polly 's varying moods .
than he had earned before in a year .
and he hardly knew which expressed the most gratefulness to god and affection for himself .
that was tom 's great secret .
the scheme to return home with his brother pirates and attend their own funerals .
they had paddled over to the missouri shore on a log .
at dusk on saturday , landing five or six miles below the village .
they had slept in the woods at the edge of the town till nearly daylight .
and had then crept through back lanes and alleys and finished their sleep
in the gallery of the church among a chaos of invalided benches .
at breakfast .
monday morning , aunt polly and mary were very loving to tom , and very attentive to his wants .
there was an unusual amount of talk .
in the course of it aunt polly said : `` well .
i do n't say it was n't a fine joke .
tom .
to keep everybody suffering 'most a week so you boys had a good time .
but it is a pity you could be so hard-hearted as to let me suffer so .
if you could come over on a log to go to your funeral .
you could have come over and give me a hint some way that you war n't dead .
but only run off . ''
`` yes , you could have done that , tom , '' said mary .
`` and i believe you would if you had thought of it . ''
`` would you , tom ? ''
said aunt polly , her face lighting wistfully .
`` say , now , would you , if you 'd thought of it ? ''
`` i. well , i do n't know .
'twould ' a ' spoiled everything . ''
`` tom .
i hoped you loved me that much .
'' said aunt polly , with a grieved tone that discomforted the boy .
`` it would have been something if you'd cared enough to think of it .
even if you did n't do it . ''
`` now , auntie , that ai n't any harm , '' pleaded mary .
`` it 's only tom 's giddy way .
he is always in such a rush that he never thinks of anything . ''
`` more 's the pity .
sid would have thought .
and sid would have come and done it , too .
tom .
you 'll look back .
some day .
when it 's too late .
and wish you 'd cared a little more for me when it would have cost you so little . ''
`` now , auntie , you know i do care for you , '' said tom .
`` i 'd know it better if you acted more like it . ''
`` i wish now i 'd thought , '' said tom , with a repentant tone .
`` but i dreamt about you , anyway .
that 's something , ai n't it ? ''
`` it ai n't much .
a cat does that much .
but it 's better than nothing .
what did you dream ? ''
`` why .
wednesday night i dreamt that you was sitting over there by the bed .
and sid was sitting by the woodbox , and mary next to him . ''
`` well , so we did .
so we always do .
i 'm glad your dreams could take even that much trouble about us . ''
`` and i dreamt that joe harper 's mother was here . ''
`` why , she was here !
did you dream any more ? ''
`` oh , lots .
but it 's so dim , now . ''
`` well , try to recollect .
ca n't you ? ''
`` somehow it seems to me that the wind .
the wind blowed the .
the. ``
`` try harder , tom !
the wind did blow something .
come ! ''
tom pressed his fingers on his forehead an anxious minute .
and then said : `` i 've got it now !
i 've got it now !
it blowed the candle ! ''
`` mercy on us !
go on , tom .
go on ! ''
`` and it seems to me that you said , 'why , i believe that that door . ' ''
`` go on , tom ! ''
`` just let me study a moment .
just a moment .
oh , yes .
you said you believed the door was open . ''
`` as i 'm sitting here , i did !
did n't i , mary !
go on ! ''
`` and then .
and then .
well i wo n't be certain , but it seems like as if you made sid go and .
and. ``
`` well ?
well ?
what did i make him do , tom ?
what did i make him do ? ''
`` you made him .
you .
oh , you made him shut it . ''
`` well , for the land 's sake !
i never heard the beat of that in all my days !
do n't tell me there ai n't anything in dreams , any more .
sereny harper shall know of this before i 'm an hour older .
i 'd like to see her get around this with her rubbage 'bout superstition .
go on , tom ! ''
`` oh , it 's all getting just as bright as day , now .
next you said i warn't bad , only mischeevous and harum-scarum , and not any more responsible than .
than .
i think it was a colt , or something . ''
`` and so it was !
well , goodness gracious !
go on , tom ! ''
`` and then you began to cry . ''
`` so i did .
so i did .
not the first time , neither .
and then. ``
`` then mrs. harper she began to cry .
and said joe was just the same .
and she wished she had n't whipped him for taking cream when she 'd throwed it out her own self. ``
`` tom !
the sperrit was upon you !
you was a prophesying .
that 's what you was doing !
land alive , go on , tom ! ''
`` then sid he said .
he said. ``
`` i do n't think i said anything , '' said sid .
`` yes you did , sid , '' said mary .
`` shut your heads and let tom go on !
what did he say , tom ? ''
`` he said .
i think he said he hoped i was better off where i was gone to .
but if i 'd been better sometimes. ``
`` there , d'you hear that !
it was his very words ! ''
`` and you shut him up sharp . ''
`` i lay i did !
there must ' a ' been an angel there .
there was an angel there , somewheres ! ''
`` and mrs. harper told about joe scaring her with a firecracker .
and you told about peter and the pain-killer. ``
`` just as true as i live ! ''
`` and then there was a whole lot of talk 'bout dragging the river for us .
and 'bout having the funeral sunday .
and then you and old miss harper hugged and cried , and she went . ''
`` it happened just so !
it happened just so , as sure as i 'm a-sitting in these very tracks .
tom , you could n't told it more like if you 'd ' a ' seen it !
and then what ?
go on , tom ! ''
`` then i thought you prayed for me .
and i could see you and hear every word you said .
and you went to bed .
and i was so sorry that i took and wrote on a piece of sycamore bark .
'we ai n't dead .
we are only off being pirates , ' and put it on the table by the candle .
and then you looked so good .
laying there asleep , that i thought i went and leaned over and kissed you on the lips . ''
`` did you , tom , did you !
i just forgive you everything for that ! ''
and she seized the boy in a crushing embrace that made him feel like the guiltiest of villains .
`` it was very kind , even though it was only a. dream , '' sid soliloquized just audibly .
`` shut up , sid !
a body does just the same in a dream as he 'd do if he was awake .
here 's a big milum apple i 've been saving for you .
tom , if you was ever found again .
now go 'long to school .
i 'm thankful to the good god and father of us all i 've got you back .
that 's long-suffering and merciful to them that believe on him and keep his word .
though goodness knows i 'm unworthy of it .
but if only the worthy ones got his blessings and had his hand to help them over the rough places .
there 's few enough would smile here or ever enter into his rest when the long night comes .
go 'long sid , mary , tom .
take yourselves off .
you 've hendered me long enough . ''
the children left for school .
and the old lady to call on mrs. harper and vanquish her realism with tom 's marvellous dream .
sid had better judgment than to utter the thought that was in his mind as he left the house .
it was this : `` pretty thin .
as long a dream as that , without any mistakes in it ! ''
what a hero tom was become , now !
he did not go skipping and prancing .
but moved with a dignified swagger as became a pirate who felt that the public eye was on him .
and indeed it was .
he tried not to seem to see the looks or hear the remarks as he passed along .
but they were food and drink to him .
smaller boys than himself flocked at his heels .
as proud to be seen with him .
and tolerated by him .
as if he had been the drummer at the head of
a procession or the elephant leading a menagerie into town .
boys of his own size pretended not to know he had been away at all .
but they were consuming with envy , nevertheless .
they would have given anything to have that swarthy sun-tanned skin of his , and his glittering notoriety .
and tom would not have parted with either for a circus .
at school the children made so much of him and of joe .
and delivered such eloquent admiration from their eyes .
that the two heroes were not long in becoming insufferably `` stuck-up . ''
they began to tell their adventures to hungry listeners .
but they only began .
it was not a thing likely to have an end , with imaginations like theirs to furnish material .
and finally .
when they got out their pipes and went serenely puffing around , the very summit of glory was reached .
tom decided that he could be independent of becky thatcher now .
glory was sufficient .
he would live for glory .
now that he was distinguished , maybe she would be wanting to `` make up . ''
well , let her .
she should see that he could be as indifferent as some other people .
presently she arrived .
tom pretended not to see her .
he moved away and joined a group of boys and girls and began to talk .
soon he observed that she was tripping gayly back and forth with flushed face and dancing eyes .
pretending to be busy chasing schoolmates , and screaming with laughter when she made a capture .
but he noticed that she always made her captures in his vicinity .
and that she seemed to cast a conscious eye in his direction at such times , too .
it gratified all the vicious vanity that was in him .
and so .
instead of winning him .
it only `` set him up '' the more and made him
the more diligent to avoid betraying that he knew she was about .
presently she gave over skylarking .
and moved irresolutely about , sighing once or twice and glancing furtively and wistfully toward tom .
then she observed that now tom was talking more particularly to amy lawrence than to any one else .
she felt a sharp pang and grew disturbed and uneasy at once .
she tried to go away , but her feet were treacherous , and carried her to the group instead .
she said to a girl almost at tom 's elbow .
with sham vivacity : `` why , mary austin !
you bad girl , why did n't you come to sunday-school ? ''
`` i did come .
did n't you see me ? ''
`` why , no !
did you ?
where did you sit ? ''
`` i was in miss peters ' class , where i always go .
i saw you . ''
`` did you ?
why , it 's funny i did n't see you .
i wanted to tell you about the picnic . ''
`` oh , that 's jolly .
who 's going to give it ? ''
`` my ma 's going to let me have one . ''
`` oh , goody .
i hope she 'll let me come . ''
`` well , she will .
the picnic 's for me .
she 'll let anybody come that i want , and i want you . ''
`` that 's ever so nice .
when is it going to be ? ''
`` by and by .
maybe about vacation . ''
`` oh , wo n't it be fun !
you going to have all the girls and boys ? ''
`` yes , every one that 's friends to me .
or wants to be '' .
and she glanced ever so furtively at tom .
but he talked right along to amy lawrence about the terrible storm on the island .
and how the lightning tore the great sycamore tree `` all to flinders
'' while he was `` standing within three feet of it . ''
`` oh , may i come ? ''
said grace miller .
`` yes . ''
`` and me ? ''
said sally rogers .
`` yes . ''
`` and me , too ? ''
said susy harper .
`` and joe ? ''
`` yes . ''
and so on .
with clapping of joyful hands till all the group had begged for invitations but tom and amy .
then tom turned coolly away , still talking , and took amy with him .
becky 's lips trembled and the tears came to her eyes .
she hid these signs with a forced gayety and went on chattering .
but the life had gone out of the picnic , now , and out of everything else .
she got away as soon as she could and hid herself
and had what her sex call `` a good cry . ''
then she sat moody , with wounded pride , till the bell rang .
she roused up .
now .
with a vindictive cast in her eye .
and gave her plaited tails a shake and said she knew what she 'd do .
at recess tom continued his flirtation with amy with jubilant self-satisfaction .
and he kept drifting about to find becky and lacerate her with the performance .
at last he spied her , but there was a sudden falling of his mercury .
she was sitting cosily on a little bench behind the schoolhouse looking at a picture-book with alfred temple .
and so absorbed were they .
and their heads so close together over the book .
that they did not seem to be conscious of anything in the world besides .
jealousy ran red-hot through tom 's veins .
he began to hate himself for throwing away the chance becky had offered for a reconciliation .
he called himself a fool , and all the hard names he could think of .
he wanted to cry with vexation .
amy chatted happily along .
as they walked , for her heart was singing , but tom 's tongue had lost its function .
he did not hear what amy was saying .
and whenever she paused expectantly he could only stammer an awkward assent , which was as often misplaced as otherwise .
he kept drifting to the rear of the schoolhouse .
again and again , to sear his eyeballs with the hateful spectacle there .
he could not help it .
and it maddened him to see .
as he thought he saw .
that becky thatcher never once suspected that he was even in the land of the living .
but she did see , nevertheless .
and she knew she was winning her fight .
too , and was glad to see him suffer as she had suffered .
amy 's happy prattle became intolerable .
tom hinted at things he had to attend to .
things that must be done .
and time was fleeting .
but in vain .
the girl chirped on .
tom thought , `` oh , hang her , ai n't i ever going to get rid of her ? ''
at last he must be attending to those things .
and she said artlessly that she would be `` around '' when school let out .
and he hastened away , hating her for it .
`` any other boy ! ''
tom thought , grating his teeth .
`` any boy in the whole town but that saint louis
smarty that thinks he dresses so fine and is aristocracy !
oh .
all right .
i licked you the first day you ever saw this town , mister , and i 'll lick you again !
you just wait till i catch you out !
i 'll just take and. ``
and he went through the motions of thrashing an imaginary boy .
pummelling the air , and kicking and gouging .
`` oh , you do , do you ?
you holler 'nough , do you ?
now , then , let that learn you ! ''
and so the imaginary flogging was finished to his satisfaction .
tom fled home at noon .
his conscience could not endure any more of amy's grateful happiness .
and his jealousy could bear no more of the other distress .
becky resumed her picture inspections with alfred .
but as the minutes dragged along and no tom came to suffer .
her triumph began to cloud and she lost interest .
gravity and absentmindedness followed , and then melancholy .
two or three times she pricked up her ear at a footstep , but it was a false hope .
no tom came .
at last she grew entirely miserable and wished she had n't carried it so far .
when poor alfred .
seeing that he was losing her .
he did not know how , kept exclaiming : `` oh , here 's a jolly one !
look at this ! ''
she lost patience at last , and said , `` oh , do n't bother me !
i do n't care for them ! ''
and burst into tears , and got up and walked away .
alfred dropped alongside and was going to try to comfort her .
but she said : `` go away and leave me alone , ca n't you !
i hate you ! ''
so the boy halted , wondering what he could have done .
for she had said she would look at pictures all through the nooning .
and she walked on , crying .
then alfred went musing into the deserted schoolhouse .
he was humiliated and angry .
he easily guessed his way to the truth .
the girl had simply made a convenience of him to vent her spite upon tom sawyer .
he was far from hating tom the less when this thought occurred to him .
he wished there was some way to get that boy into trouble without much risk to himself .
tom 's spelling-book fell under his eye .
here was his opportunity .
he gratefully opened to the lesson for the afternoon and poured ink upon the page .
becky .
glancing in at a window behind him at the moment .
saw the act , and moved on , without discovering herself .
she started homeward , now , intending to find tom and tell him .
tom would be thankful and their troubles would be healed .
before she was half way home , however , she had changed her mind .
the thought of tom 's treatment of her when she was talking
about her picnic came scorching back and filled her with shame .
she resolved to let him get whipped on the damaged spelling-book's account .
and to hate him forever , into the bargain .
tom arrived at home in a dreary mood .
and the first thing his aunt said to him showed him that
he had brought his sorrows to an unpromising market : `` tom .
i 've a notion to skin you alive ! ''
`` auntie , what have i done ? ''
`` well , you 've done enough .
here i go over to sereny harper .
like an old softy .
expecting i 'm going to make her believe all that rubbage about that dream .
when lo and behold you she 'd found out from joe that you
was over here and heard all the talk we had that night .
tom , i do n't know what is to become of a boy that will act like that .
it makes me feel so bad to think you could let me go to sereny
harper and make such a fool of myself and never say a word . ''
this was a new aspect of the thing .
his smartness of the morning had seemed to tom a good joke before , and very ingenious .
it merely looked mean and shabby now .
he hung his head and could not think of anything to say for a moment .
then he said : `` auntie , i wish i had n't done it .
but i did n't think . ''
`` oh , child , you never think .
you never think of anything but your own selfishness .
you could think to come all the way over here from
jackson 's island in the night to laugh at our troubles .
and you could think to fool me with a lie about a dream .
but you could n't ever think to pity us and save us from sorrow . ''
`` auntie , i know now it was mean , but i did n't mean to be mean .
i did n't , honest .
and besides , i did n't come over here to laugh at you that night . ''
`` what did you come for , then ? ''
`` it was to tell you not to be uneasy about us , because we had n't got drownded . ''
`` tom .
tom .
i would be the thankfullest soul in this world if i
could believe you ever had as good a thought as that .
but you know you never did .
and i know it , tom . ''
`` indeed and 'deed i did , auntie .
i wish i may never stir if i did n't . ''
`` oh , tom , do n't lie .
do n't do it .
it only makes things a hundred times worse . ''
`` it ai n't a lie , auntie .
it 's the truth .
i wanted to keep you from grieving .
that was all that made me come . ''
`` i 'd give the whole world to believe that .
it would cover up a power of sins , tom .
i 'd 'most be glad you 'd run off and acted so bad .
but it ai n't reasonable .
because , why did n't you tell me , child ? ''
`` why .
you see .
when you got to talking about the funeral .
i just got all full of the idea of our coming and hiding in the church .
and i couldn't somehow bear to spoil it .
so i just put the bark back in my pocket and kept mum . ''
`` what bark ? ''
`` the bark i had wrote on to tell you we 'd gone pirating .
i wish , now , you 'd waked up when i kissed you .
i do , honest . ''
the hard lines in his aunt 's face relaxed and a sudden tenderness dawned in her eyes .
`` did you kiss me , tom ? ''
`` why , yes , i did . ''
`` are you sure you did , tom ? ''
`` why , yes , i did , auntie .
certain sure . ''
`` what did you kiss me for , tom ? ''
`` because i loved you so , and you laid there moaning and i was so sorry . ''
the words sounded like truth .
the old lady could not hide a tremor in her voice when she said : `` kiss me again .
tom ! .
and be off with you to school , now , and don't bother me any more . ''
the moment he was gone .
she ran to a closet and got out the ruin of a jacket which tom had gone pirating in .
then she stopped .
with it in her hand , and said to herself : `` no , i do n't dare .
poor boy , i reckon he 's lied about it .
but it 's a blessed , blessed lie , there 's such a comfort come from it .
i hope the lord .
i know the lord will forgive him , because it was such good-heartedness in him to tell it .
but i do n't want to find out it 's a lie .
i wo n't look . ''
she put the jacket away , and stood by musing a minute .
twice she put out her hand to take the garment again , and twice she refrained .
once more she ventured .
and this time she fortified herself with the thought : '' it 's a good lie .
it 's a good lie .
i wo n't let it grieve me . ''
so she sought the jacket pocket .
a moment later she was reading tom 's piece of bark through
flowing tears and saying : `` i could forgive the boy .
now , if he 'd committed a million sins ! ''
there was something about aunt polly 's manner .
when she kissed tom , that swept away his low spirits and made him lighthearted and happy again .
he started to school and had the luck of coming upon becky thatcher at the head of meadow lane .
his mood always determined his manner .
without a moment 's hesitation he ran to her and said : `` i acted mighty mean today .
becky , and i 'm so sorry .
i wo n't ever , ever do that way again , as long as ever i live .
please make up , wo n't you ? ''
the girl stopped and looked him scornfully in the face :
`` i 'll thank you to keep yourself to yourself .
mr. thomas sawyer .
i'll never speak to you again . ''
she tossed her head and passed on .
tom was so stunned that he had not even presence of mind enough to say `` who cares .
miss smarty ? ''
until the right time to say it had gone by .
so he said nothing .
but he was in a fine rage , nevertheless .
he moped into the schoolyard wishing she were a boy .
and imagining how he would trounce her if she were .
he presently encountered her and delivered a stinging remark as he passed .
she hurled one in return , and the angry breach was complete .
it seemed to becky .
in her hot resentment .
that she could hardly wait for school to `` take in .
'' she was so impatient to see tom flogged for the injured spelling-book .
if she had had any lingering notion of exposing alfred temple , tom's offensive fling had driven it entirely away .
poor girl , she did not know how fast she was nearing trouble herself .
the master , mr. dobbins , had reached middle age with an unsatisfied ambition .
the darling of his desires was .
to be a doctor , but poverty had decreed that he should be nothing higher than a village schoolmaster .
every day he took a mysterious book out of his desk and
absorbed himself in it at times when no classes were reciting .
he kept that book under lock and key .
there was not an urchin in school but was perishing to have a glimpse of it .
but the chance never came .
every boy and girl had a theory about the nature of that book .
but no two theories were alike , and there was no way of getting at the facts in the case .
now .
as becky was passing by the desk .
which stood near the door , she noticed that the key was in the lock !
it was a precious moment .
she glanced around .
found herself alone , and the next instant she had the book in her hands .
the titlepage .
professor somebody 's anatomy .
carried no information to her mind .
so she began to turn the leaves .
she came at once upon a handsomely engraved and colored frontispiece .
a human figure , stark naked .
at that moment a shadow fell on the page and tom sawyer
stepped in at the door and caught a glimpse of the picture .
becky snatched at the book to close it .
and had the hard luck to tear the pictured page half down the middle .
she thrust the volume into the desk , turned the key , and burst out crying with shame and vexation .
`` tom sawyer .
you are just as mean as you can be .
to sneak up on a person and look at what they 're looking at . ''
`` how could i know you was looking at anything ? ''
`` you ought to be ashamed of yourself , tom sawyer .
you know you're going to tell on me .
and oh , what shall i do , what shall i do !
i 'll be whipped , and i never was whipped in school . ''
then she stamped her little foot and said : `` be so mean if you want to !
i know something that 's going to happen .
you just wait and you 'll see !
hateful , hateful , hateful ! `` .
and she flung out of the house with a new explosion of crying .
tom stood still , rather flustered by this onslaught .
presently he said to himself : `` what a curious kind of a fool a girl is !
never been licked in school !
shucks !
what 's a licking !
that 's just like a girl .
they 're so thin-skinned and chicken-hearted .
well .
of course i ai n't going to tell old dobbins on this little fool .
because there 's other ways of getting even on her , that ai n't so mean .
but what of it ?
old dobbins will ask who it was tore his book .
nobody 'll answer .
then he 'll do just the way he always does .
ask first one and then t'other .
and when he comes to the right girl he 'll know it , without any telling .
girls ' faces always tell on them .
they ai n't got any backbone .
she 'll get licked .
well .
it 's a kind of a tight place for becky thatcher .
because there ai n't any way out of it . ''
tom conned the thing a moment longer , and then added : `` all right , though .
she 'd like to see me in just such a fix .
let her sweat it out ! ''
tom joined the mob of skylarking scholars outside .
in a few moments the master arrived and school `` took in . ''
tom did not feel a strong interest in his studies .
every time he stole a glance at the girls ' side of the room becky 's face troubled him .
considering all things .
he did not want to pity her , and yet it was all he could do to help it .
he could get up no exultation that was really worthy the name .
presently the spelling-book discovery was made .
and tom 's mind was entirely full of his own matters for a while after that .
becky roused up from her lethargy of distress and showed good interest in the proceedings .
she did not expect that tom could get out of his trouble
by denying that he spilt the ink on the book himself .
and she was right .
the denial only seemed to make the thing worse for tom .
becky supposed she would be glad of that .
and she tried to believe she was glad of it , but she found she was not certain .
when the worst came to the worst .
she had an impulse to get up and tell on alfred temple .
but she made an effort and forced herself to keep still .
because , said she to herself , `` he 'll tell about me tearing the picture sure .
i would n't say a word , not to save his life ! ''
tom took his whipping and went back to his seat not at all broken-hearted .
for he thought it was possible that he had unknowingly upset the ink on the spelling-book himself .
in some skylarking bout .
he had denied it for form 's sake and because it was custom .
and had stuck to the denial from principle .
a whole hour drifted by .
the master sat nodding in his throne , the air was drowsy with the hum of study .
by and by .
mr. dobbins straightened himself up .
yawned .
then unlocked his desk .
and reached for his book , but seemed undecided whether to take it out or leave it .
most of the pupils glanced up languidly .
but there were two among them that watched his movements with intent eyes .
mr. dobbins fingered his book absently for a while .
then took it out and settled himself in his chair to read !
tom shot a glance at becky .
he had seen a hunted and helpless rabbit look as she did , with a gun levelled at its head .
instantly he forgot his quarrel with her .
quick .
something must be done !
done in a flash , too !
but the very imminence of the emergency paralyzed his invention .
good ! .
he had an inspiration !
he would run and snatch the book , spring through the door and fly .
but his resolution shook for one little instant , and the chance was lost .
the master opened the volume .
if tom only had the wasted opportunity back again !
too late .
there was no help for becky now , he said .
the next moment the master faced the school .
every eye sank under his gaze .
there was that in it which smote even the innocent with fear .
there was silence while one might count ten .
the master was gathering his wrath .
then he spoke : `` who tore this book ? ''
there was not a sound .
one could have heard a pin drop .
the stillness continued .
the master searched face after face for signs of guilt .
`` benjamin rogers , did you tear this book ? ''
a denial .
another pause .
`` joseph harper , did you ? ''
another denial .
tom 's uneasiness grew more and more intense under the slow torture of these proceedings .
the master scanned the ranks of boys .
considered a while , then turned to the girls : `` amy lawrence ? ''
a shake of the head .
`` gracie miller ? ''
the same sign .
`` susan harper , did you do this ? ''
another negative .
the next girl was becky thatcher .
tom was trembling from head to foot with excitement and a sense of the hopelessness of the situation .
`` rebecca thatcher '' [ tom glanced at her face .
it was white with terror ] .
`` did you tear .
no , look me in the face '' [ her hands rose in appeal ] .
`` did you tear this book ? ''
a thought shot like lightning through tom 's brain .
he sprang to his feet and shouted .
`` i done it ! ''
the school stared in perplexity at this incredible folly .
tom stood a moment , to gather his dismembered faculties .
and when he stepped forward to go to his punishment the surprise .
the gratitude .
the adoration that shone upon him out of poor becky 's eyes seemed pay enough for a hundred floggings .
inspired by the splendor of his own act .
he took without an outcry the most merciless flaying that even mr. dobbins had ever administered .
and also received with indifference the added cruelty of a command to remain two hours after school should be dismissed .
for he knew who would wait for him outside till his captivity was done .
and not count the tedious time as loss , either .
tom went to bed that night planning vengeance against alfred temple .
for with shame and repentance becky had told him all , not forgetting her own treachery .
but even the longing for vengeance had to give way .
soon .
to pleasanter musings , and he fell asleep at last with becky 's latest words lingering dreamily in his ear .
`` tom , how could you be so noble ! ''
vacation was approaching .
the schoolmaster .
always severe .
grew severer and more exacting than ever .
for he wanted the school to make a good showing on `` examination '' day .
his rod and his ferule were seldom idle now .
at least among the smaller pupils .
only the biggest boys , and young ladies of eighteen and twenty , escaped lashing .
mr. dobbins ' lashings were very vigorous ones , too .
for although he carried .
under his wig .
a perfectly bald and shiny head .
he had only reached middle age , and there was no sign of feebleness in his muscle .
as the great day approached , all the tyranny that was in him came to the surface .
he seemed to take a vindictive pleasure in punishing the least shortcomings .
the consequence was .
that the smaller boys spent their days in terror and suffering and their nights in plotting revenge .
they threw away no opportunity to do the master a mischief .
but he kept ahead all the time .
the retribution that followed every vengeful success was so sweeping and
majestic that the boys always retired from the field badly worsted .
at last they conspired together and hit upon a plan that promised a dazzling victory .
they swore in the signpainter 's boy , told him the scheme , and asked his help .
he had his own reasons for being delighted .
for the master boarded in his father 's family and had given the boy ample cause to hate him .
the master 's wife would go on a visit to the country in a few days .
and there would be nothing to interfere with the plan .
the master always prepared himself for great occasions by getting pretty well fuddled .
and the signpainter 's boy said that when the dominie had reached the proper condition on
examination evening he would `` manage the thing '' while he napped in his chair .
then he would have him awakened at the right time and hurried away to school .
in the fulness of time the interesting occasion arrived .
at eight in the evening the schoolhouse was brilliantly lighted .
and adorned with wreaths and festoons of foliage and flowers .
the master sat throned in his great chair upon a raised platform , with his blackboard behind him .
he was looking tolerably mellow .
three rows of benches on each side and six rows in front of him were
occupied by the dignitaries of the town and by the parents of the pupils .
to his left .
back of the rows of citizens .
was a spacious temporary platform upon which were seated the scholars
who were to take part in the exercises of the evening .
rows of small boys , washed and dressed to an intolerable state of discomfort .
rows of gawky big boys .
snowbanks of girls and young ladies clad in lawn and muslin and conspicuously conscious of their bare arms .
their grandmothers ' ancient trinkets , their bits of pink and blue ribbon and the flowers in their hair .
all the rest of the house was filled with non-participating scholars .
the exercises began .
a very little boy stood up and sheepishly recited .
'' you 'd scarce expect one of my age to speak in public on the stage .
'' etc.. accompanying himself with the painfully exact and spasmodic gestures which a machine might have used .
supposing the machine to be a trifle out of order .
but he got through safely .
though cruelly scared , and got a fine round of applause when he made his manufactured bow and retired .
a little shamefaced girl lisped .
`` mary had a little lamb .
'' etc. , performed a compassion-inspiring curtsy , got her meed of applause , and sat down flushed and happy .
tom sawyer stepped forward with conceited confidence and soared into the unquenchable
and indestructible `` give me liberty or give me death '' speech .
with fine fury and frantic gesticulation , and broke down in the middle of it .
a ghastly stage-fright seized him , his legs quaked under him and he was like to choke .
true .
he had the manifest sympathy of the house but he had the house 's silence .
too , which was even worse than its sympathy .
the master frowned , and this completed the disaster .
tom struggled awhile and then retired , utterly defeated .
there was a weak attempt at applause , but it died early .
`` the boy stood on the burning deck '' followed .
also `` the assyrian came down , '' and other declamatory gems .
then there were reading exercises , and a spelling fight .
the meagre latin class recited with honor .
the prime feature of the evening was in order , now .
original `` compositions '' by the young ladies .
each in her turn stepped forward to the edge of the platform .
cleared her throat .
held up her manuscript ( tied with dainty ribbon ) .
and proceeded to read , with labored attention to `` expression '' and punctuation .
the themes were the same that had been illuminated upon similar occasions by their mothers before them .
their grandmothers , and doubtless all their ancestors in the female line clear back to the crusades .
`` friendship '' was one .
`` memories of other days '' .
`` religion in history '' .
`` dream land '' .
`` the advantages of culture '' .
`` forms of political government compared and contrasted '' .
`` melancholy '' .
`` filial love '' .
`` heart longings , '' etc. , etc .
a prevalent feature in these compositions was a nursed and petted melancholy .
another was a wasteful and opulent gush of `` fine language '' .
another was a tendency to lug in by the ears particularly
prized words and phrases until they were worn entirely out .
and a peculiarity that conspicuously marked and marred them was the inveterate and intolerable sermon
that wagged its crippled tail at the end of each and every one of them .
no matter what the subject might be .
a brainracking effort was made to squirm it into some aspect or
other that the moral and religious mind could contemplate with edification .
the glaring insincerity of these sermons was not sufficient to compass the banishment of the fashion from the schools .
and it is not sufficient today .
it never will be sufficient while the world stands , perhaps .
there is no school in all our land where the young ladies
do not feel obliged to close their compositions with a sermon .
and you will find that the sermon of the most frivolous and the least
religious girl in the school is always the longest and the most relentlessly pious .
but enough of this .
homely truth is unpalatable .
let us return to the `` examination . ''
the first composition that was read was one entitled `` is this , then , life ? ''
perhaps the reader can endure an extract from it : `` in the common walks of life .
with what delightful emotions does the youthful mind look forward to some anticipated scene of festivity !
imagination is busy sketching rose-tinted pictures of joy .
in fancy .
the voluptuous votary of fashion sees herself amid the festive throng , 'the observed of all observers . '
her graceful form , arrayed in snowy robes , is whirling through the mazes of the joyous dance .
her eye is brightest , her step is lightest in the gay assembly .
`` in such delicious fancies time quickly glides by .
and the welcome hour arrives for her entrance into the elysian world .
of which she has had such bright dreams .
how fairy-like does everything appear to her enchanted vision !
each new scene is more charming than the last .
but after a while she finds that beneath this goodly exterior .
all is vanity , the flattery which once charmed her soul , now grates harshly upon her ear .
the ballroom has lost its charms .
and with wasted health and imbittered heart .
she turns away with the conviction that earthly pleasures can not satisfy the longings of the soul ! ''
and so forth and so on .
there was a buzz of gratification from time to time during the reading .
accompanied by whispered ejaculations of `` how sweet ! ''
`` how eloquent ! ''
`` so true ! ''
etc. , and after the thing had closed with a peculiarly afflicting sermon the applause was enthusiastic .
then arose a slim .
melancholy girl .
whose face had the `` interesting '' paleness that comes of pills and indigestion .
and read a `` poem . ''
two stanzas of it will do : `` a missouri maiden 's farewell to alabama `` alabama , goodbye !
i love thee well !
but yet for a while do i leave thee now !
sad , yes , sad thoughts of thee my heart doth swell , and burning recollections throng my brow !
for i have wandered through thy flowery woods .
have roamed and read near tallapoosa 's stream .
have listened to tallassee 's warring floods , and wooed on coosa 's side aurora 's beam .
`` yet shame i not to bear an o'erfull heart , nor blush to turn behind my tearful eyes .
't is from no stranger land i now must part .
't is to no strangers left i yield these sighs .
welcome and home were mine within this state , whose vales i leave .
whose spires fade fast from me and cold must be mine eyes .
and heart , and tete , when , dear alabama !
they turn cold on thee ! ''
there were very few there who knew what `` tete '' meant .
but the poem was very satisfactory , nevertheless .
next appeared a dark-complexioned .
black-eyed .
black-haired young lady .
who paused an impressive moment .
assumed a tragic expression .
and began to read in a measured , solemn tone : `` a vision `` dark and tempestuous was night .
around the throne on high not a single star quivered .
but the deep intonations of the heavy thunder constantly vibrated upon the ear .
whilst the terrific lightning revelled in angry mood through the cloudy chambers of heaven .
seeming to scorn the power exerted over its terror by the illustrious franklin !
even the boisterous winds unanimously came forth from their mystic homes .
and blustered about as if to enhance by their aid the wildness of the scene .
`` at such a time , so dark , so dreary , for human sympathy my very spirit sighed .
but instead thereof , `` 'my dearest friend , my counsellor , my comforter and guide .
my joy in grief , my second bliss in joy , ' came to my side .
she moved like one of those bright beings pictured in the
sunny walks of fancy 's eden by the romantic and young .
a queen of beauty unadorned save by her own transcendent loveliness .
so soft was her step .
it failed to make even a sound .
and but for the magical thrill imparted by her genial touch .
as other unobtrusive beauties , she would have glided away unperceived .
unsought .
a strange sadness rested upon her features .
like icy tears upon the robe of december .
as she pointed to the contending elements without , and bade me contemplate the two beings presented . ''
this nightmare occupied some ten pages of manuscript and wound up with a sermon
so destructive of all hope to non-presbyterians that it took the first prize .
this composition was considered to be the very finest effort of the evening .
the mayor of the village .
in delivering the prize to the author of it .
made a warm speech in which he said that it was by
far the most `` eloquent '' thing he had ever listened to .
and that daniel webster himself might well be proud of it .
it may be remarked .
in passing .
that the number of compositions in which the word `` beauteous '' was over-fondled .
and human experience referred to as `` life 's page , '' was up to the usual average .
now the master .
mellow almost to the verge of geniality .
put his chair aside .
turned his back to the audience .
and began to draw a map of america on the blackboard , to exercise the geography class upon .
but he made a sad business of it with his unsteady hand .
and a smothered titter rippled over the house .
he knew what the matter was , and set himself to right it .
he sponged out lines and remade them .
but he only distorted them more than ever , and the tittering was more pronounced .
he threw his entire attention upon his work .
now , as if determined not to be put down by the mirth .
he felt that all eyes were fastened upon him .
he imagined he was succeeding , and yet the tittering continued .
it even manifestly increased .
and well it might .
there was a garret above , pierced with a scuttle over his head .
and down through this scuttle came a cat , suspended around the haunches by a string .
she had a rag tied about her head and jaws to keep her from mewing .
as she slowly descended she curved upward and clawed at the string .
she swung downward and clawed at the intangible air .
the tittering rose higher and higher .
the cat was within six inches of the absorbed teacher 's head .
down , down .
a little lower .
and she grabbed his wig with her desperate claws .
clung to it .
and was snatched up into the garret in an instant with her trophy still in her possession !
and how the light did blaze abroad from the master's bald pate .
for the signpainter 's boy had gilded it !
that broke up the meeting .
the boys were avenged .
vacation had come .
note : .
the pretended `` compositions '' quoted in this taken without alteration from a volume entitled `` prose and poetry .
by a western lady '' .
but they are exactly and precisely after the schoolgirl pattern .
and hence are much happier than any mere imitations could be .
tom joined the new order of cadets of temperance .
being attracted by the showy character of their `` regalia . ''
he promised to abstain from smoking , chewing , and profanity as long as he remained a member .
now he found out a new thing .
namely .
that to promise not to do a thing is the surest way in the
world to make a body want to go and do that very thing .
tom soon found himself tormented with a desire to drink and swear .
the desire grew to be so intense that nothing but the hope of a chance
to display himself in his red sash kept him from withdrawing from the order .
fourth of july was coming .
but he soon gave that up .
gave it up before he had worn his shackles over forty-eight hours .
and fixed his hopes upon old judge frazer .
justice of the peace .
who was apparently on his deathbed and would have a big public funeral .
since he was so high an official .
during three days tom was deeply concerned about the judge 's condition and hungry for news of it .
sometimes his hopes ran high .
so high that he would venture to get out his regalia and practise before the looking-glass .
but the judge had a most discouraging way of fluctuating .
at last he was pronounced upon the mend .
and then convalescent .
tom was disgusted .
and felt a sense of injury , too .
he handed in his resignation at once .
and that night the judge suffered a relapse and died .
tom resolved that he would never trust a man like that again .
the funeral was a fine thing .
the cadets paraded in a style calculated to kill the late member with envy .
tom was a free boy again , however .
there was something in that .
he could drink and swear , now .
but found to his surprise that he did not want to .
the simple fact that he could , took the desire away , and the charm of it .
tom presently wondered to find that his coveted vacation was beginning to hang a little heavily on his hands .
he attempted a diary .
but nothing happened during three days , and so he abandoned it .
the first of all the negro minstrel shows came to town , and made a sensation .
tom and joe harper got up a band of performers and were happy for two days .
even the glorious fourth was in some sense a failure .
for it rained hard .
there was no procession in consequence .
and the greatest man in the world ( as tom supposed ) .
mr. benton , an actual united states senator , proved an overwhelming disappointment .
for he was not twenty-five feet high , nor even anywhere in the neighborhood of it .
a circus came .
the boys played circus for three days afterward in tents made of rag carpeting .
admission , three pins for boys , two for girls .
and then circusing was abandoned .
a phrenologist and a mesmerizer came .
and went again and left the village duller and drearier than ever .
there were some boys-and-girls ' parties .
but they were so few and so delightful that they only made the aching voids between ache the harder .
becky thatcher was gone to her constantinople home to stay with her parents during vacation .
so there was no bright side to life anywhere .
the dreadful secret of the murder was a chronic misery .
it was a very cancer for permanency and pain .
then came the measles .
during two long weeks tom lay a prisoner , dead to the world and its happenings .
he was very ill , he was interested in nothing .
when he got upon his feet at last and moved feebly downtown .
a melancholy change had come over everything and every creature .
there had been a `` revival .
'' and everybody had `` got religion , '' not only the adults , but even the boys and girls .
tom went about .
hoping against hope for the sight of one blessed sinful face , but disappointment crossed him everywhere .
he found joe harper studying a testament , and turned sadly away from the depressing spectacle .
he sought ben rogers , and found him visiting the poor with a basket of tracts .
he hunted up jim hollis .
who called his attention to the precious blessing of his late measles as a warning .
every boy he encountered added another ton to his depression .
and when .
in desperation .
he flew for refuge at last to the bosom of huckleberry finn and was received with a scriptural quotation .
his heart broke and he crept home and to bed realizing that he alone of all the town was lost .
forever and forever .
and that night there came on a terrific storm .
with driving rain , awful claps of thunder and blinding sheets of lightning .
he covered his head with the bedclothes and waited in a horror of suspense for his doom .
for he had not the shadow of a doubt that all this hubbub was about him .
he believed he had taxed the forbearance of the powers above
to the extremity of endurance and that this was the result .
it might have seemed to him a waste of pomp and
ammunition to kill a bug with a battery of artillery .
but there seemed nothing incongruous about the getting up such an expensive thunderstorm
as this to knock the turf from under an insect like himself .
by and by the tempest spent itself and died without accomplishing its object .
the boy 's first impulse was to be grateful , and reform .
his second was to wait .
for there might not be any more storms .
the next day the doctors were back .
tom had relapsed .
the three weeks he spent on his back this time seemed an entire age .
when he got abroad at last he was hardly grateful that he had been spared .
remembering how lonely was his estate , how companionless and forlorn he was .
he drifted listlessly down the street and found jim hollis acting as
judge in a juvenile court that was trying a cat for murder .
in the presence of her victim , a bird .
he found joe harper and huck finn up an alley eating a stolen melon .
poor lads !
they .
like tom .
had suffered a relapse .
at last the sleepy atmosphere was stirred .
and vigorously : the murder trial came on in the court .
it became the absorbing topic of village talk immediately .
tom could not get away from it .
every reference to the murder sent a shudder to his heart .
for his troubled conscience and fears almost persuaded him that these
remarks were put forth in his hearing as `` feelers '' .
he did not see how he could be suspected of knowing anything about the murder .
but still he could not be comfortable in the midst of this gossip .
it kept him in a cold shiver all the time .
he took huck to a lonely place to have a talk with him .
it would be some relief to unseal his tongue for a little while .
to divide his burden of distress with another sufferer .
moreover , he wanted to assure himself that huck had remained discreet .
`` huck , have you ever told anybody about .
that ? ''
`` 'bout what ? ''
`` you know what . ''
`` oh .
'course i have n't . ''
`` never a word ? ''
`` never a solitary word , so help me .
what makes you ask ? ''
`` well , i was afeard . ''
`` why , tom sawyer , we would n't be alive two days if that got found out .
you know that . ''
tom felt more comfortable .
after a pause : `` huck , they could n't anybody get you to tell , could they ? ''
`` get me to tell ?
why , if i wanted that halfbreed devil to drownd me they could get me to tell .
they ai n't no different way . ''
`` well , that 's all right , then .
i reckon we 're safe as long as we keep mum .
but let 's swear again , anyway .
it 's more surer . ''
`` i 'm agreed . ''
so they swore again with dread solemnities .
`` what is the talk around , huck ?
i 've heard a power of it . ''
`` talk ?
well , it 's just muff potter , muff potter , muff potter all the time .
it keeps me in a sweat , constant , so 's i want to hide som'ers . ''
`` that 's just the same way they go on round me .
i reckon he 's a goner .
do n't you feel sorry for him , sometimes ? ''
`` most always .
most always .
he ai n't no account .
but then he hai n't ever done anything to hurt anybody .
just fishes a little , to get money to get drunk on .
and loafs around considerable .
but lord , we all do that .
leastways most of us .
preachers and such like .
but he 's kind of good .
he give me half a fish , once , when there war n't enough for two .
and lots of times he 's kind of stood by me when i was out of luck . ''
`` well , he 's mended kites for me , huck , and knitted hooks on to my line .
i wish we could get him out of there . ''
`` my !
we could n't get him out , tom .
and besides , 'twould n't do any good .
they 'd ketch him again . ''
`` yes .
so they would .
but i hate to hear 'em abuse him so like the dickens when he never done .
that . ''
`` i do too , tom .
lord .
i hear 'em say he 's the bloodiest looking villain in this country .
and they wonder he was n't ever hung before . ''
`` yes , they talk like that , all the time .
i 've heard 'em say that if he was to get free they 'd lynch him . ''
`` and they 'd do it , too . ''
the boys had a long talk , but it brought them little comfort .
as the twilight drew on .
they found themselves hanging about the neighborhood of the little isolated jail .
perhaps with an undefined hope that something would happen that might clear away their difficulties .
but nothing happened .
there seemed to be no angels or fairies interested in this luckless captive .
the boys did as they had often done before .
went to the cell grating and gave potter some tobacco and matches .
he was on the ground floor and there were no guards .
his gratitude for their gifts had always smote their consciences before .
it cut deeper than ever , this time .
they felt cowardly and treacherous to the last degree when potter
said : `` you 've been mighty good to me .
boys .
better ' n anybody else in this town .
and i do n't forget it , i do n't .
often i says to myself .
says i .
' i used to mend all the boys ' kites and things .
and show 'em where the good fishin ' places was .
and befriend 'em what i could , and now they've all forgot old muff when he 's in trouble .
but tom do n't , and huck do n't .
they do n't forget him , says i , 'and i do n't forget them . '
well , boys , i done an awful thing .
drunk and crazy at the time .
that 's the only way i account for it .
and now i got to swing for it , and it 's right .
right , and best , too , i reckon .
hope so , anyway .
well , we wo n't talk about that .
i do n't want to make you feel bad .
you 've befriended me .
but what i want to say , is , do n't you ever get drunk .
then you won't ever get here .
stand a litter furder west .
so .
that 's it .
it 's a prime comfort to see faces that 's friendly
when a body 's in such a muck of trouble .
and there do n't none come here but yourn .
good friendly faces .
good friendly faces .
git up on one another 's backs and let me touch 'em .
that 's it .
shake hands .
yourn 'll come through the bars , but mine 's too big .
little hands , and weak .
but they 've helped muff potter a power , and they 'd help him more if they could . ''
tom went home miserable , and his dreams that night were full of horrors .
the next day and the day after .
he hung about the courtroom .
drawn by an almost irresistible impulse to go in , but forcing himself to stay out .
huck was having the same experience .
they studiously avoided each other .
each wandered away , from time to time , but the same dismal fascination always brought them back presently .
tom kept his ears open when idlers sauntered out of the courtroom , but invariably heard distressing news .
the toils were closing more and more relentlessly around poor potter .
at the end of the second day the village talk was to
the effect that injun joe 's evidence stood firm and unshaken .
and that there was not the slightest question as to what the jury 's verdict would be .
tom was out late , that night , and came to bed through the window .
he was in a tremendous state of excitement .
it was hours before he got to sleep .
all the village flocked to the courthouse the next morning , for this was to be the great day .
both sexes were about equally represented in the packed audience .
after a long wait the jury filed in and took their places .
shortly afterward .
potter .
pale and haggard .
timid and hopeless .
was brought in , with chains upon him , and seated where all the curious eyes could stare at him .
no less conspicuous was injun joe , stolid as ever .
there was another pause , and then the judge arrived and the sheriff proclaimed the opening of the court .
the usual whisperings among the lawyers and gathering together of papers followed .
these details and accompanying delays worked up an atmosphere of preparation that was as impressive as it was fascinating .
now a witness was called who testified that he found muff potter washing in the brook .
at an early hour of the morning that the murder was discovered , and that he immediately sneaked away .
after some further questioning , counsel for the prosecution said : `` take the witness . ''
the prisoner raised his eyes for a moment .
but dropped them again when his own counsel said : `` i have no questions to ask him . ''
the next witness proved the finding of the knife near the corpse .
counsel for the prosecution said : `` take the witness . ''
`` i have no questions to ask him , '' potter 's lawyer replied .
a third witness swore he had often seen the knife in potter's possession .
`` take the witness . ''
counsel for potter declined to question him .
the faces of the audience began to betray annoyance .
did this attorney mean to throw away his client 's life without an effort ?
several witnesses deposed concerning potter 's guilty behavior when brought to the scene of the murder .
they were allowed to leave the stand without being cross-questioned .
every detail of the damaging circumstances that occurred in the graveyard upon that
morning which all present remembered so well was brought out by credible witnesses .
but none of them were cross-examined by potter 's lawyer .
the perplexity and dissatisfaction of the house expressed itself in murmurs and provoked a reproof from the bench .
counsel for the prosecution now said : `` by the oaths of citizens whose simple word is above suspicion .
we have fastened this awful crime , beyond all possibility of question , upon the unhappy prisoner at the bar .
we rest our case here . ''
a groan escaped from poor potter .
and he put his face in his hands and rocked his body softly to and fro .
while a painful silence reigned in the courtroom .
many men were moved , and many women 's compassion testified itself in tears .
counsel for the defence rose and said : `` your honor .
in our remarks at the opening of this trial .
we foreshadowed our purpose to prove that our client did this fearful deed
while under the influence of a blind and irresponsible delirium produced by drink .
we have changed our mind .
we shall not offer that plea . ''
[ then to the clerk : ] `` call thomas sawyer ! ''
a puzzled amazement awoke in every face in the house , not even excepting potter 's .
every eye fastened itself with wondering interest upon tom as he rose and took his place upon the stand .
the boy looked wild enough , for he was badly scared .
the oath was administered .
`` thomas sawyer , where were you on the seventeenth of june , about the hour of midnight ? ''
tom glanced at injun joe 's iron face and his tongue failed him .
the audience listened breathless , but the words refused to come .
after a few moments .
however .
the boy got a little of his strength back .
and managed to put enough of it into his voice to make
part of the house hear : `` in the graveyard ! ''
`` a little bit louder , please .
do n't be afraid .
you were. ``
`` in the graveyard . ''
a contemptuous smile flitted across injun joe 's face .
`` were you anywhere near horse williams ' grave ? ''
`` yes , sir . ''
`` speak up .
just a trifle louder .
how near were you ? ''
`` near as i am to you . ''
`` were you hidden , or not ? ''
`` i was hid . ''
`` where ? ''
`` behind the elms that 's on the edge of the grave . ''
injun joe gave a barely perceptible start .
`` any one with you ? ''
`` yes , sir .
i went there with. ``
`` wait .
wait a moment .
never mind mentioning your companion 's name .
we will produce him at the proper time .
did you carry anything there with you . ''
tom hesitated and looked confused .
`` speak out , my boy .
do n't be diffident .
the truth is always respectable .
what did you take there ? ''
`` only a. a. dead cat . ''
there was a ripple of mirth , which the court checked .
`` we will produce the skeleton of that cat .
now , my boy , tell us everything that occurred .
tell it in your own way .
do n't skip anything , and do n't be afraid . ''
tom began .
hesitatingly at first , but as he warmed to his subject his words flowed more and more easily .
in a little while every sound ceased but his own voice .
every eye fixed itself upon him .
with parted lips and bated breath the audience hung upon his words .
taking no note of time , rapt in the ghastly fascinations of the tale .
the strain upon pent emotion reached its climax when the boy said : `` .
and as the doctor fetched the board around and muff potter fell , injun joe jumped with the knife and. ``
crash !
quick as lightning the halfbreed sprang for a window , tore his way through all opposers , and was gone !
tom was a glittering hero once more .
the pet of the old , the envy of the young .
his name even went into immortal print , for the village paper magnified him .
there were some that believed he would be president , yet , if he escaped hanging .
as usual .
the fickle .
unreasoning world took muff potter to its bosom and fondled him as lavishly as it had abused him before .
but that sort of conduct is to the world 's credit .
therefore it is not well to find fault with it .
tom 's days were days of splendor and exultation to him , but his nights were seasons of horror .
injun joe infested all his dreams , and always with doom in his eye .
hardly any temptation could persuade the boy to stir abroad after nightfall .
poor huck was in the same state of wretchedness and terror .
for tom had told the whole story to the lawyer the night before the great day of the trial .
and huck was sore afraid that his share in the business might leak out .
yet , notwithstanding injun joe 's flight had saved him the suffering of testifying in court .
the poor fellow had got the attorney to promise secrecy , but what of that ?
since tom 's harassed conscience had managed to drive him to the lawyer 's house by night and
wring a dread tale from lips that had been sealed with the dismalest and most formidable of oaths .
huck's confidence in the human race was wellnigh obliterated .
daily muff potter 's gratitude made tom glad he had spoken .
but nightly he wished he had sealed up his tongue .
half the time tom was afraid injun joe would never be captured .
the other half he was afraid he would be .
he felt sure he never could draw a safe breath again
until that man was dead and he had seen the corpse .
rewards had been offered , the country had been scoured , but no injun joe was found .
one of those omniscient and aweinspiring marvels .
a detective .
came up from st. louis .
moused around .
shook his head .
looked wise , and made that sort of astounding success which members of that craft usually achieve .
that is to say , he `` found a clew . ''
but you can't hang a `` clew '' for murder .
and so after that detective had got through and gone home .
tom felt just as insecure as he was before .
the slow days drifted on , and each left behind it a slightly lightened weight of apprehension .
there comes a time in every rightly-constructed boy 's life when he
has a raging desire to go somewhere and dig for hidden treasure .
this desire suddenly came upon tom one day .
he sallied out to find joe harper , but failed of success .
next he sought ben rogers .
he had gone fishing .
presently he stumbled upon huck finn the red-handed .
huck would answer .
tom took him to a private place and opened the matter to him confidentially .
huck was willing .
huck was always willing to take a hand in any enterprise that offered entertainment and required no capital .
for he had a troublesome superabundance of that sort of time which is not money .
`` where 'll we dig ? ''
said huck .
`` oh , most anywhere . ''
`` why , is it hid all around ? ''
`` no , indeed it ai n't .
it 's hid in mighty particular places , huck .
sometimes on islands .
sometimes in rotten chests under the end of a limb of an old dead tree .
just where the shadow falls at midnight .
but mostly under the floor in ha'nted houses . ''
`` who hides it ? ''
`` why , robbers , of course .
who 'd you reckon ?
sunday-school sup'rintendents ? ''
`` i do n't know .
if 't was mine i would n't hide it .
i 'd spend it and have a good time . ''
`` so would i. but robbers do n't do that way .
they always hide it and leave it there . ''
`` do n't they come after it any more ? ''
`` no , they think they will , but they generally forget the marks , or else they die .
anyway , it lays there a long time and gets rusty .
and by and by somebody finds an old yellow paper that tells how to find the marks .
a paper that 's got to be ciphered over about a week because it 's mostly signs and hy'roglyphics . ''
`` hyro .
which ? ''
`` hy'roglyphics .
pictures and things , you know , that do n't seem to mean anything . ''
`` have you got one of them papers , tom ? ''
`` no . ''
`` well then , how you going to find the marks ? ''
`` i do n't want any marks .
they always bury it under a ha'nted house or on an island .
or under a dead tree that 's got one limb sticking out .
well , we 've tried jackson 's island a little , and we can try it again some time .
and there 's the old ha'nted house up the still-house branch , and there 's lots of dead-limb trees .
dead loads of 'em . ''
`` is it under all of them ? ''
`` how you talk !
no ! ''
`` then how you going to know which one to go for ? ''
`` go for all of 'em ! ''
`` why , tom , it 'll take all summer . ''
`` well , what of that ?
suppose you find a brass pot with a hundred dollars in it .
all rusty and gray , or rotten chest full of di'monds .
how's that ? ''
huck 's eyes glowed .
`` that 's bully .
plenty bully enough for me .
just you gim me the hundred dollars and i do n't want no di'monds . ''
`` all right .
but i bet you i ai n't going to throw off on di'monds .
some of 'em 's worth twenty dollars apiece .
there ai n't any , hardly , but's worth six bits or a dollar . ''
`` no !
is that so ? ''
`` cert'nly .
anybody 'll tell you so .
hai n't you ever seen one , huck ? ''
`` not as i remember . ''
`` oh , kings have slathers of them . ''
`` well , i don ' know no kings , tom . ''
`` i reckon you do n't .
but if you was to go to europe you 'd see a raft of 'em hopping around . ''
`` do they hop ? ''
`` hop ? .
your granny !
no ! ''
`` well , what did you say they did , for ? ''
`` shucks , i only meant you 'd see 'em .
not hopping , of course .
what do they want to hop for ? .
but i mean you 'd just see 'em .
scattered around , you know , in a kind of a general way .
like that old humpbacked richard . ''
`` richard ?
what 's his other name ? ''
`` he did n't have any other name .
kings do n't have any but a given name . ''
`` no ? ''
`` but they do n't . ''
`` well , if they like it , tom , all right .
but i do n't want to be a king and have only just a given name , like a nigger .
but say .
where you going to dig first ? ''
`` well , i do n't know .
s'pose we tackle that old dead-limb tree on the hill t'other side of still-house branch ? ''
`` i 'm agreed . ''
so they got a crippled pick and a shovel , and set out on their three-mile tramp .
they arrived hot and panting .
and threw themselves down in the shade of a neighboring elm to rest and have a smoke .
`` i like this , '' said tom .
`` so do i . ''
`` say .
huck , if we find a treasure here , what you going to do with your share ? ''
`` well .
i 'll have pie and a glass of soda every day .
and i 'll go to every circus that comes along .
i bet i 'll have a gay time . ''
`` well , ai n't you going to save any of it ? ''
`` save it ?
what for ? ''
`` why , so as to have something to live on , by and by . ''
`` oh , that ai n't any use .
pap would come back to thish-yer town some day and get
his claws on it if i did n't hurry up .
and i tell you he 'd clean it out pretty quick .
what you going to do with yourn , tom ? ''
`` i 'm going to buy a new drum .
and a sure'nough sword , and a red necktie and a bull pup , and get married . ''
`` married ! ''
`` that 's it . ''
`` tom , you .
why , you ai n't in your right mind . ''
`` wait .
you 'll see . ''
`` well , that 's the foolishest thing you could do .
look at pap and my mother .
fight !
why , they used to fight all the time .
i remember , mighty well . ''
`` that ai n't anything .
the girl i 'm going to marry wo n't fight . ''
`` tom , i reckon they 're all alike .
they 'll all comb a body .
now you better think 'bout this awhile .
i tell you you better .
what 's the name of the gal ? ''
`` it ai n't a gal at all .
it 's a girl . ''
`` it 's all the same , i reckon .
some says gal , some says girl .
both's right , like enough .
anyway , what 's her name , tom ? ''
`` i 'll tell you some time .
not now . ''
`` all right .
that 'll do .
only if you get married i 'll be more lonesomer than ever . ''
`` no you wo n't .
you 'll come and live with me .
now stir out of this and we 'll go to digging . ''
they worked and sweated for half an hour .
no result .
they toiled another halfhour .
still no result .
huck said : `` do they always bury it as deep as this ? ''
`` sometimes .
not always .
not generally .
i reckon we have n't got the right place . ''
so they chose a new spot and began again .
the labor dragged a little , but still they made progress .
they pegged away in silence for some time .
finally huck leaned on his shovel .
swabbed the beaded drops from his brow with his sleeve .
and said : `` where you going to dig next , after we get this one ? ''
`` i reckon maybe we 'll tackle the old tree that 's
over yonder on cardiff hill back of the widow 's . ''
`` i reckon that 'll be a good one .
but wo n't the widow take it away from us , tom ?
it 's on her land . ''
`` she take it away !
maybe she 'd like to try it once .
whoever finds one of these hid treasures , it belongs to him .
it do n't make any difference whose land it 's on . ''
that was satisfactory .
the work went on .
by and by huck said : `` blame it , we must be in the wrong place again .
what do you think ? ''
`` it is mighty curious , huck .
i do n't understand it .
sometimes witches interfere .
i reckon maybe that 's what 's the trouble now . ''
`` shucks !
witches ai n't got no power in the daytime . ''
`` well , that 's so .
i did n't think of that .
oh , i know what the matter is !
what a blamed lot of fools we are !
you got to find out where the shadow of the limb falls at midnight .
and that 's where you dig ! ''
`` then consound it , we 've fooled away all this work for nothing .
now hang it all , we got to come back in the night .
it 's an awful long way .
can you get out ? ''
`` i bet i will .
we 've got to do it tonight .
too .
because if somebody sees these holes they 'll know in a
minute what 's here and they 'll go for it . ''
`` well , i 'll come around and maow tonight . ''
`` all right .
let 's hide the tools in the bushes . ''
the boys were there that night , about the appointed time .
they sat in the shadow waiting .
it was a lonely place , and an hour made solemn by old traditions .
spirits whispered in the rustling leaves .
ghosts lurked in the murky nooks .
the deep baying of a hound floated up out of the distance , an owl answered with his sepulchral note .
the boys were subdued by these solemnities , and talked little .
by and by they judged that twelve had come .
they marked where the shadow fell , and began to dig .
their hopes commenced to rise .
their interest grew stronger , and their industry kept pace with it .
the hole deepened and still deepened .
but every time their hearts jumped to hear the pick strike upon something , they only suffered a new disappointment .
it was only a stone or a chunk .
at last tom said : `` it ai n't any use , huck , we 're wrong again . ''
`` well , but we ca n't be wrong .
we spotted the shadder to a dot . ''
`` i know it , but then there 's another thing . ''
`` what 's that ? `` .
`` why , we only guessed at the time .
like enough it was too late or too early . ''
huck dropped his shovel .
`` that 's it , '' said he .
`` that 's the very trouble .
we got to give this one up .
we ca n't ever tell the right time .
and besides this kind of thing's too awful .
here this time of night with witches and ghosts a-fluttering around so .
i feel as if something 's behind me all the time .
and i'm afeard to turn around , becuz maybe there 's others in front a-waiting for a chance .
i been creeping all over , ever since i got here . ''
`` well , i 've been pretty much so , too , huck .
they most always put in a dead man when they bury a treasure under a tree .
to look out for it . ''
`` lordy ! ''
`` yes , they do .
i 've always heard that . ''
`` tom , i do n't like to fool around much where there 's dead people .
a body 's bound to get into trouble with 'em , sure . ''
`` i do n't like to stir 'em up , either .
s'pose this one here was to stick his skull out and say something ! ''
`` do n't tom !
it 's awful . ''
`` well , it just is .
huck , i do n't feel comfortable a bit . ''
`` say , tom , let 's give this place up , and try somewheres else . ''
`` all right , i reckon we better . ''
`` what 'll it be ? ''
tom considered awhile .
and then said : `` the ha'nted house .
that 's it ! ''
`` blame it , i do n't like ha'nted houses , tom .
why , they 're a dern sight worse ' n dead people .
dead people might talk .
maybe .
but they do n't come sliding around in a shroud .
when you ai n't noticing .
and peep over your shoulder all of a sudden and grit their teeth , the way a ghost does .
i could n't stand such a thing as that , tom .
nobody could . ''
`` yes , but , huck , ghosts do n't travel around only at night .
they won't hender us from digging there in the daytime . ''
`` well , that 's so .
but you know mighty well people do n't go about that ha'nted house in the day nor the night . ''
`` well .
that 's mostly because they do n't like to go where a man 's been murdered , anyway .
but nothing 's ever been seen around that house except in the night .
just some blue lights slipping by the windows .
no regular ghosts . ''
`` well .
where you see one of them blue lights flickering around .
tom , you can bet there 's a ghost mighty close behind it .
it stands to reason .
becuz you know that they do n't anybody but ghosts use 'em . ''
`` yes , that 's so .
but anyway they do n't come around in the daytime .
so what 's the use of our being afeard ? ''
`` well , all right .
we 'll tackle the ha'nted house if you say so .
but i reckon it 's taking chances . ''
they had started down the hill by this time .
there in the middle of the moonlit valley below them stood the `` ha'nted '' house .
utterly isolated .
its fences gone long ago .
rank weeds smothering the very doorsteps .
the chimney crumbled to ruin , the window-sashes vacant , a corner of the roof caved in .
the boys gazed awhile , half expecting to see a blue light flit past a window .
then talking in a low tone .
as befitted the time and the circumstances .
they struck far off to the right .
to give the haunted house a wide berth .
and took their way homeward through the woods that adorned the rearward side of cardiff hill .
about noon the next day the boys arrived at the dead tree .
they had come for their tools .
tom was impatient to go to the haunted house .
huck was measurably so , also .
but suddenly said : `` lookyhere , tom , do you know what day it is ? ''
tom mentally ran over the days of the week .
and then quickly lifted his eyes with a startled look in them .
`` my !
i never once thought of it , huck ! ''
`` well .
i did n't neither , but all at once it popped onto me that it was friday . ''
`` blame it , a body ca n't be too careful , huck .
we might ' a ' got into an awful scrape , tackling such a thing on a friday . ''
`` might !
better say we would !
there 's some lucky days , maybe , but friday ai n't . ''
`` any fool knows that .
i do n't reckon you was the first that found it out , huck . ''
`` well , i never said i was , did i ?
and friday ai n't all , neither .
i had a rotten bad dream last night .
dreampt about rats . ''
`` no !
sure sign of trouble .
did they fight ? ''
`` no . ''
`` well , that 's good , huck .
when they do n't fight it 's only a sign that there 's trouble around , you know .
all we got to do is to look mighty sharp and keep out of it .
we 'll drop this thing for today , and play .
do you know robin hood , huck ? ''
`` no .
who 's robin hood ? ''
`` why , he was one of the greatest men that was ever in england .
and the best .
he was a robber . ''
`` cracky , i wisht i was .
who did he rob ? ''
`` only sheriffs and bishops and rich people and kings , and such like .
but he never bothered the poor .
he loved 'em .
he always divided up with 'em perfectly square . ''
`` well , he must ' a ' been a brick . ''
`` i bet you he was , huck .
oh , he was the noblest man that ever was .
they ai n't any such men now , i can tell you .
he could lick any man in england , with one hand tied behind him .
and he could take his yew bow and plug a ten-cent piece every time .
a mile and a half . ''
`` what 's a yew bow ? ''
`` i do n't know .
it 's some kind of a bow , of course .
and if he hit that dime only on the edge he would set down and cry .
and curse .
but we'll play robin hood .
it 's nobby fun .
i 'll learn you . ''
`` i 'm agreed . ''
so they played robin hood all the afternoon .
now and then casting a yearning eye down upon the haunted house
and passing a remark about the morrow 's prospects and possibilities there .
as the sun began to sink into the west they took their way homeward athwart the long
shadows of the trees and soon were buried from sight in the forests of cardiff hill .
on saturday , shortly after noon , the boys were at the dead tree again .
they had a smoke and a chat in the shade .
and then dug a little in their last hole .
not with great hope .
but merely because tom said there were so many cases where people had
given up a treasure after getting down within six inches of it .
and then somebody else had come along and turned it up with a single thrust of a shovel .
the thing failed this time .
however .
so the boys shouldered their tools and went away feeling that they had not trifled with fortune .
but had fulfilled all the requirements that belong to the business of treasure-hunting .
when they reached the haunted house there was something so weird and
grisly about the dead silence that reigned there under the baking sun .
and something so depressing about the loneliness and desolation of the place .
that they were afraid , for a moment , to venture in .
then they crept to the door and took a trembling peep .
they saw a weedgrown , floorless room , unplastered , an ancient fireplace , vacant windows , a ruinous staircase .
and here , there , and everywhere hung ragged and abandoned cobwebs .
they presently entered .
softly .
with quickened pulses .
talking in whispers , ears alert to catch the slightest sound , and muscles tense and ready for instant retreat .
in a little while familiarity modified their fears and they gave the place a critical and interested examination .
rather admiring their own boldness , and wondering at it , too .
next they wanted to look upstairs .
this was something like cutting off retreat .
but they got to daring each other , and of course there could be but one result .
they threw their tools into a corner and made the ascent .
up there were the same signs of decay .
in one corner they found a closet that promised mystery , but the promise was a fraud .
there was nothing in it .
their courage was up now and well in hand .
they were about to go down and begin work when .
`` sh ! ''
said tom .
`` what is it ? ''
whispered huck , blanching with fright .
`` sh ! ...
there ! ...
hear it ? ''
`` yes ! ...
oh , my !
let 's run ! ''
`` keep still !
do n't you budge !
they 're coming right toward the door . ''
the boys stretched themselves upon the floor with their eyes to knotholes in the planking .
and lay waiting , in a misery of fear .
`` they 've stopped ... . no .
coming ... . here they are .
do n't whisper another word , huck .
my goodness , i wish i was out of this ! ''
two men entered .
each boy said to himself : `` there 's the old deaf
and dumb spaniard that 's been about town once or twice lately .
never saw t'other man before . ''
`` t'other '' was a ragged , unkempt creature , with nothing very pleasant in his face .
the spaniard was wrapped in a serape .
he had bushy white whiskers .
long white hair flowed from under his sombrero , and he wore green goggles .
when they came in , `` t'other '' was talking in a low voice .
they sat down on the ground .
facing the door , with their backs to the wall , and the speaker continued his remarks .
his manner became less guarded and his words more distinct as he proceeded : `` no .
'' said he , `` i 've thought it all over , and i do n't like it .
it's dangerous . ''
`` dangerous ! ''
grunted the `` deaf and dumb '' spaniard .
to the vast surprise of the boys .
`` milksop ! ''
this voice made the boys gasp and quake .
it was injun joe 's !
there was silence for some time .
then joe said : `` what 's any more dangerous than that job up yonder .
but nothing 's come of it . ''
`` that 's different .
away up the river so , and not another house about .
'two n't ever be known that we tried , anyway , long as we did n't succeed . ''
`` well , what 's more dangerous than coming here in the daytime ! .
anybody would suspicion us that saw us . ''
`` i know that .
but there war n't any other place as handy after that fool of a job .
i want to quit this shanty .
i wanted to yesterday .
only it war n't any use trying to stir out of here .
with those infernal boys playing over there on the hill right in full view . ''
`` those infernal boys '' quaked again under the inspiration of this remark .
and thought how lucky it was that they had remembered it was friday and concluded to wait a day .
they wished in their hearts they had waited a year .
the two men got out some food and made a luncheon .
after a long and thoughtful silence , injun joe said : `` look here , lad .
you go back up the river where you belong .
wait there till you hear from me .
i 'll take the chances on dropping into this town just once more , for a look .
we 'll do that 'dangerous ' job after i've spied around a little and think things look well for it .
then for texas !
we 'll leg it together ! ''
this was satisfactory .
both men presently fell to yawning , and injun joe said : `` i 'm dead for sleep !
it 's your turn to watch . ''
he curled down in the weeds and soon began to snore .
his comrade stirred him once or twice and he became quiet .
presently the watcher began to nod .
his head drooped lower and lower , both men began to snore now .
the boys drew a long , grateful breath .
tom whispered : `` now 's our chance .
come ! ''
huck said : `` i ca n't .
i 'd die if they was to wake . ''
tom urged .
huck held back .
at last tom rose slowly and softly , and started alone .
but the first step he made wrung such a hideous creak from
the crazy floor that he sank down almost dead with fright .
he never made a second attempt .
the boys lay there counting the dragging moments till it seemed
to them that time must be done and eternity growing gray .
and then they were grateful to note that at last the sun was setting .
now one snore ceased .
injun joe sat up , stared around .
smiled grimly upon his comrade , whose head was drooping upon his knees .
stirred him up with his foot and said : `` here !
you 're a watchman , ai n't you !
all right , though .
nothing's happened . ''
`` my !
have i been asleep ? ''
`` oh , partly , partly .
nearly time for us to be moving , pard .
what 'll we do with what little swag we 've got left ? ''
`` i do n't know .
leave it here as we 've always done , i reckon .
no use to take it away till we start south .
six hundred and fifty in silver's something to carry . ''
`` well .
all right .
it wo n't matter to come here once more . ''
`` no .
but i 'd say come in the night as we used to do .
it 's better . ''
`` yes : but look here .
it may be a good while before i get the right chance at that job .
accidents might happen .
'tai n't in such a very good place .
we 'll just regularly bury it .
and bury it deep . ''
`` good idea .
'' said the comrade .
who walked across the room .
knelt down , raised one of the rearward hearth-stones and took out a bag that jingled pleasantly .
he subtracted from it twenty or thirty dollars for himself and as much for injun joe .
and passed the bag to the latter .
who was on his knees in the corner , now , digging with his bowie-knife .
the boys forgot all their fears , all their miseries in an instant .
with gloating eyes they watched every movement .
luck ! .
the splendor of it was beyond all imagination !
six hundred dollars was money enough to make half a dozen boys rich !
here was treasure-hunting under the happiest auspices .
there would not be any bothersome uncertainty as to where to dig .
they nudged each other every moment .
eloquent nudges and easily understood , for they simply meant .
`` oh , but ai n't you glad now we're here ! ''
joe 's knife struck upon something .
`` hello ! ''
said he .
`` what is it ? ''
said his comrade .
`` half-rotten plank .
no , it 's a box , i believe .
here .
bear a hand and we'll see what it 's here for .
never mind , i 've broke a hole . ''
he reached his hand in and drew it out .
`` man , it 's money ! ''
the two men examined the handful of coins .
they were gold .
the boys above were as excited as themselves , and as delighted .
joe 's comrade said : `` we 'll make quick work of this .
there 's an old rusty pick over amongst the weeds in the corner the other side of the fireplace .
i saw it a minute ago . ''
he ran and brought the boys ' pick and shovel .
injun joe took the pick .
looked it over critically , shook his head , muttered something to himself , and then began to use it .
the box was soon unearthed .
it was not very large .
it was iron bound and had been very strong before the slow years had injured it .
the men contemplated the treasure awhile in blissful silence .
`` pard , there 's thousands of dollars here , '' said injun joe .
`` 't was always said that murrel 's gang used to be around here one summer .
'' the stranger observed .
`` i know it , '' said injun joe .
`` and this looks like it , i should say . ''
`` now you wo n't need to do that job . ''
the halfbreed frowned .
said he : `` you do n't know me .
least you do n't know all about that thing .
'tain't robbery altogether .
it 's revenge ! ''
and a wicked light flamed in his eyes .
`` i 'll need your help in it .
when it 's finished .
then texas .
go home to your nance and your kids , and stand by till you hear from me . ''
`` well .
if you say so .
what 'll we do with this .
bury it again ? ''
`` yes .
[ ravishing delight overhead . ]
no !
by the great sachem , no !
[ profound distress overhead . ]
i 'd nearly forgot .
that pick had fresh earth on it !
[ the boys were sick with terror in a moment . ]
what business has a pick and a shovel here ?
what business with fresh earth on them ?
who brought them here .
and where are they gone ?
have you heard anybody ? .
seen anybody ?
what !
bury it again and leave them to come and see the ground disturbed ?
not exactly .
not exactly .
we 'll take it to my den . ''
`` why , of course !
might have thought of that before .
you mean number one ? ''
`` no .
number two .
under the cross .
the other place is bad .
too common . ''
`` all right .
it 's nearly dark enough to start . ''
injun joe got up and went about from window to window cautiously peeping out .
presently he said : `` who could have brought those tools here ?
do you reckon they can be upstairs ? ''
the boys ' breath forsook them .
injun joe put his hand on his knife .
halted a moment , undecided , and then turned toward the stairway .
the boys thought of the closet , but their strength was gone .
the steps came creaking up the stairs .
the intolerable distress of the situation woke the stricken resolution of the lads .
they were about to spring for the closet .
when there was a crash of rotten timbers and injun joe
landed on the ground amid the debris of the ruined stairway .
he gathered himself up cursing , and his comrade said : `` now what 's the use of all that ?
if it 's anybody , and they 're up there , let them stay there .
who cares ?
if they want to jump down , now , and get into trouble , who objects ?
it will be dark in fifteen minutes .
and then let them follow us if they want to .
i 'm willing .
in my opinion .
whoever hove those things in here caught a sight of us and took us for ghosts or devils or something .
i 'll bet they 're running yet . ''
joe grumbled awhile .
then he agreed with his friend that what daylight was left
ought to be economized in getting things ready for leaving .
shortly afterward they slipped out of the house in the deepening twilight .
and moved toward the river with their precious box .
tom and huck rose up .
weak but vastly relieved , and stared after them through the chinks between the logs of the house .
follow ?
not they .
they were content to reach ground again without broken necks , and take the townward track over the hill .
they did not talk much .
they were too much absorbed in hating themselves .
hating the ill luck that made them take the spade and the pick there .
but for that , injun joe never would have suspected .
he would have hidden the silver with the gold to wait there till his `` revenge '' was satisfied .
and then he would have had the misfortune to find that money turn up missing .
bitter , bitter luck that the tools were ever brought there !
they resolved to keep a lookout for that spaniard when he should
come to town spying out for chances to do his revengeful job .
and follow him to '' number two , '' wherever that might be .
then a ghastly thought occurred to tom .
`` revenge ?
what if he means us , huck ! ''
`` oh , do n't ! ''
said huck , nearly fainting .
they talked it all over .
and as they entered town they agreed to believe that he might possibly mean somebody else .
at least that he might at least mean nobody but tom , since only tom had testified .
very , very small comfort it was to tom to be alone in danger !
company would be a palpable improvement , he thought .
the adventure of the day mightily tormented tom 's dreams that night .
four times he had his hands on that rich treasure and four times it wasted to nothingness
in his fingers as sleep forsook him and wakefulness brought back the hard reality of his misfortune .
as he lay in the early morning recalling the incidents of his great adventure .
he noticed that they seemed curiously subdued and far away .
somewhat as if they had happened in another world , or in a time long gone by .
then it occurred to him that the great adventure itself must be a dream !
there was one very strong argument in favor of this idea .
namely , that the quantity of coin he had seen was too vast to be real .
he had never seen as much as fifty dollars in one mass before .
and he was like all boys of his age and station in life .
in that he imagined that all references to '' hundreds ''
and `` thousands '' were mere fanciful forms of speech .
and that no such sums really existed in the world .
he never had supposed for a moment that so large a sum as a
hundred dollars was to be found in actual money in any one 's possession .
if his notions of hidden treasure had been analyzed .
they would have been found to consist of a handful of real dimes and a bushel of vague .
splendid , ungraspable dollars .
but the incidents of his adventure grew sensibly sharper and clearer under the attrition of thinking them over .
and so he presently found himself leaning to the impression that the thing might not have been a dream .
after all .
this uncertainty must be swept away .
he would snatch a hurried breakfast and go and find huck .
huck was sitting on the gunwale of a flatboat .
listlessly dangling his feet in the water and looking very melancholy .
tom concluded to let huck lead up to the subject .
if he did not do it , then the adventure would be proved to have been only a dream .
`` hello , huck ! ''
`` hello , yourself . ''
silence , for a minute .
`` tom .
if we 'd ' a ' left the blame tools at the dead tree .
we 'd ' a ' got the money .
oh , ai n't it awful ! ''
`` 'tai n't a dream , then , 'tai n't a dream !
somehow i most wish it was .
dog 'd if i do n't , huck . ''
`` what ai n't a dream ? ''
`` oh , that thing yesterday .
i been half thinking it was . ''
`` dream !
if them stairs had n't broke down you 'd ' a ' seen how much dream it was !
i 've had dreams enough all night .
with that patch-eyed spanish devil going for me all through 'em .
rot him ! ''
`` no , not rot him .
find him !
track the money ! ''
`` tom , we 'll never find him .
a feller do n't have only one chance for such a pile .
and that one 's lost .
i 'd feel mighty shaky if i was to see him , anyway . ''
`` well , so 'd i. but i 'd like to see him , anyway .
and track him out .
to his number two . ''
`` number two .
yes , that 's it .
i been thinking 'bout that .
but i ca n't make nothing out of it .
what do you reckon it is ? ''
`` i dono .
it 's too deep .
say , huck .
maybe it 's the number of a house ! ''
`` goody ! ...
no , tom , that ai n't it .
if it is , it ai n't in this one-horse town .
they ai n't no numbers here . ''
`` well , that 's so .
lem me think a minute .
here .
it 's the number of a room .
in a tavern , you know ! ''
`` oh , that 's the trick !
they ai n't only two taverns .
we can find out quick . ''
`` you stay here , huck , till i come . ''
tom was off at once .
he did not care to have huck 's company in public places .
he was gone half an hour .
he found that in the best tavern , no .
2 had long been occupied by a young lawyer , and was still so occupied .
in the less ostentatious house , no .
2 was a mystery .
the tavern-keeper's young son said it was kept locked all the time .
and he never saw anybody go into it or come out of it except at night .
he did not know any particular reason for this state of things .
had had some little curiosity , but it was rather feeble .
had made the most of the mystery by entertaining himself with the idea that that room was `` ha'nted '' .
had noticed that there was a light in there the night before .
`` that 's what i 've found out , huck .
i reckon that 's the very no .
2 we're after . ''
`` i reckon it is , tom .
now what you going to do ? ''
`` lem me think . ''
tom thought a long time .
then he said : `` i 'll tell you .
the back door of that no .
2 is the door that comes out into that little close alley
between the tavern and the old rattle trap of a brick store .
now you get hold of all the doorkeys you can find .
and i 'll nip all of auntie 's .
and the first dark night we 'll go there and try 'em .
and mind you .
keep a lookout for injun joe .
because he said he was going to drop into town and
spy around once more for a chance to get his revenge .
if you see him , you just follow him .
and if he do n't go to that no .
2 , that ai n't the place . ''
`` lordy , i do n't want to foller him by myself ! ''
`` why , it 'll be night , sure .
he might n't ever see you .
and if he did , maybe he 'd never think anything . ''
`` well , if it 's pretty dark i reckon i 'll track him .
i dono .
i dono .
i'll try . ''
`` you bet i 'll follow him , if it 's dark , huck .
why .
he might ' a ' found out he could n't get his revenge .
and be going right after that money . ''
`` it 's so , tom , it 's so .
i 'll foller him .
i will , by jingoes ! ''
`` now you 're talking !
do n't you ever weaken , huck , and i wo n't . ''
that night tom and huck were ready for their adventure .
they hung about the neighborhood of the tavern until after nine .
one watching the alley at a distance and the other the tavern door .
nobody entered the alley or left it .
nobody resembling the spaniard entered or left the tavern door .
the night promised to be a fair one .
so tom went home with the understanding that if a considerable degree of darkness came on .
huck was to come and `` maow , '' whereupon he would slip out and try the keys .
but the night remained clear .
and huck closed his watch and retired to bed in an empty sugar hogshead about twelve .
tuesday the boys had the same ill luck .
also wednesday .
but thursday night promised better .
tom slipped out in good season with his aunt's old tin lantern .
and a large towel to blindfold it with .
he hid the lantern in huck 's sugar hogshead and the watch began .
an hour before midnight the tavern closed up and its lights ( the only ones thereabouts ) were put out .
no spaniard had been seen .
nobody had entered or left the alley .
everything was auspicious .
the blackness of darkness reigned , the perfect stillness was interrupted only by occasional mutterings of distant thunder .
tom got his lantern .
lit it in the hogshead .
wrapped it closely in the towel , and the two adventurers crept in the gloom toward the tavern .
huck stood sentry and tom felt his way into the alley .
then there was a season of waiting anxiety that weighed upon huck 's spirits like a mountain .
he began to wish he could see a flash from the lantern .
it would frighten him , but it would at least tell him that tom was alive yet .
it seemed hours since tom had disappeared .
surely he must have fainted .
maybe he was dead .
maybe his heart had burst under terror and excitement .
in his uneasiness huck found himself drawing closer and closer to the alley .
fearing all sorts of dreadful things , and momentarily expecting some catastrophe to happen that would take away his breath .
there was not much to take away .
for he seemed only able to inhale it by thimblefuls .
and his heart would soon wear itself out , the way it was beating .
suddenly there was a flash of light and tom came tearing by him : `` run ! ''
said he .
`` run , for your life ! ''
he need n't have repeated it .
once was enough .
huck was making thirty or forty miles an hour before the repetition was uttered .
the boys never stopped till they reached the shed of a deserted slaughter-house at the lower end of the village .
just as they got within its shelter the storm burst and the rain poured down .
as soon as tom got his breath he said : `` huck , it was awful !
i tried two of the keys , just as soft as i could .
but they seemed to make such a power of racket that
i could n't hardly get my breath i was so scared .
they would n't turn in the lock , either .
well .
without noticing what i was doing , i took hold of the knob , and open comes the door !
it war n't locked !
i hopped in , and shook off the towel , and , great caesar 's ghost ! ''
`` what ! .
what 'd you see , tom ? ''
`` huck , i most stepped onto injun joe 's hand ! ''
`` no ! ''
`` yes !
he was lying there .
sound asleep on the floor , with his old patch on his eye and his arms spread out . ''
`` lordy , what did you do ?
did he wake up ? ''
`` no , never budged .
drunk , i reckon .
i just grabbed that towel and started ! ''
`` i 'd never ' a ' thought of the towel , i bet ! ''
`` well , i would .
my aunt would make me mighty sick if i lost it . ''
`` say , tom , did you see that box ? ''
`` huck , i did n't wait to look around .
i did n't see the box , i did n't see the cross .
i did n't see anything but a bottle and a tin cup on the floor by injun joe .
yes , i saw two barrels and lots more bottles in the room .
do n't you see , now , what 's the matter with that ha'nted room ? ''
`` how ? ''
`` why , it 's ha'nted with whiskey !
maybe all the temperance taverns have got a ha'nted room , hey , huck ? ''
`` well , i reckon maybe that 's so .
who 'd ' a ' thought such a thing ?
but say .
tom , now 's a mighty good time to get that box , if injun joe's drunk . ''
`` it is , that !
you try it ! ''
huck shuddered .
`` well , no .
i reckon not . ''
`` and i reckon not , huck .
only one bottle alongside of injun joe ain't enough .
if there 'd been three , he 'd be drunk enough and i 'd do it . ''
there was a long pause for reflection .
and then tom said : `` lookyhere .
huck , less not try that thing any more till we know injun joe 's not in there .
it 's too scary .
now .
if we watch every night .
we'll be dead sure to see him go out .
some time or other , and then we'll snatch that box quicker ' n lightning . ''
`` well , i 'm agreed .
i 'll watch the whole night long .
and i 'll do it every night .
too , if you 'll do the other part of the job . ''
`` all right , i will .
all you got to do is to trot up hooper street a block and maow .
and if i 'm asleep , you throw some gravel at the window and that 'll fetch me . ''
`` agreed , and good as wheat ! ''
`` now , huck , the storm 's over , and i 'll go home .
it 'll begin to be daylight in a couple of hours .
you go back and watch that long , will you ? ''
`` i said i would , tom , and i will .
i 'll ha'nt that tavern every night for a year !
i 'll sleep all day and i 'll stand watch all night . ''
`` that 's all right .
now , where you going to sleep ? ''
`` in ben rogers ' hayloft .
he lets me , and so does his pap 's nigger man , uncle jake .
i tote water for uncle jake whenever he wants me to .
and any time i ask him he gives me a little something to eat if he can spare it .
that 's a mighty good nigger , tom .
he likes me , becuz i do n't ever act as if i was above him .
sometime i 've set right down and eat with him .
but you need n't tell that .
a body 's got to do things when he 's awful hungry
he would n't want to do as a steady thing . ''
`` well , if i do n't want you in the daytime , i 'll let you sleep .
i won't come bothering around .
any time you see something 's up , in the night , just skip right around and maow . ''
the first thing tom heard on friday morning was a glad piece of news .
judge thatcher 's family had come back to town the night before .
both injun joe and the treasure sunk into secondary importance for a moment .
and becky took the chief place in the boy 's interest .
he saw her and they had an exhausting good time playing ``
hispy '' and `` gully-keeper '' with a crowd of their schoolmates .
the day was completed and crowned in a peculiarly satisfactory way : becky teased
her mother to appoint the next day for the long-promised and long-delayed picnic .
and she consented .
the child 's delight was boundless .
and tom 's not more moderate .
the invitations were sent out before sunset .
and straightway the young folks of the village were thrown into a fever of preparation and pleasurable anticipation .
tom 's excitement enabled him to keep awake until a pretty late hour .
and he had good hopes of hearing huck's '' maow .
'' and of having his treasure to astonish becky and the picnickers with , next day .
but he was disappointed .
no signal came that night .
morning came .
eventually .
and by ten or eleven o'clock a giddy and rollicking company were gathered at judge thatcher 's .
and everything was ready for a start .
it was not the custom for elderly people to mar the picnics with their presence .
the children were considered safe enough under the wings of a few young
ladies of eighteen and a few young gentlemen of twenty-three or thereabouts .
the old steam ferry-boat was chartered for the occasion .
presently the gay throng filed up the main street laden with provision-baskets .
sid was sick and had to miss the fun .
mary remained at home to entertain him .
the last thing mrs. thatcher said to becky , was : `` you 'll not get back till late .
perhaps you 'd better stay all night with some of the girls that live near the ferry-landing , child . ''
`` then i 'll stay with susy harper , mamma . ''
`` very well .
and mind and behave yourself and do n't be any trouble . ''
presently , as they tripped along , tom said to becky : `` say .
i 'll tell you what we 'll do .
'stead of going to joe harper 's we'll climb right up the hill and stop at the widow douglas ' .
she 'll have ice-cream !
she has it most every day .
dead loads of it .
and she 'll be awful glad to have us . ''
`` oh , that will be fun ! ''
then becky reflected a moment and said : `` but what will mamma say ? ''
`` how 'll she ever know ? ''
the girl turned the idea over in her mind , and said reluctantly : `` i reckon it 's wrong .
but. ``
`` but shucks !
your mother wo n't know , and so what 's the harm ?
all she wants is that you 'll be safe .
and i bet you she 'd ' a ' said go
there if she 'd ' a ' thought of it .
i know she would ! ''
the widow douglas ' splendid hospitality was a tempting bait .
it and tom 's persuasions presently carried the day .
so it was decided to say nothing to anybody about the night 's programme .
presently it occurred to tom that maybe huck might come this very night and give the signal .
the thought took a deal of the spirit out of his anticipations .
still he could not bear to give up the fun at widow douglas ' .
and why should he give it up , he reasoned .
the signal did not come the night before , so why should it be any more likely to come tonight ?
the sure fun of the evening outweighed the uncertain treasure .
and .
boy-like .
he determined to yield to the stronger inclination and not allow himself
to think of the box of money another time that day .
three miles below town the ferryboat stopped at the mouth of a woody hollow and tied up .
the crowd swarmed ashore and soon the forest distances and craggy heights echoed far and near with shoutings and laughter .
all the different ways of getting hot and tired were gone through with .
and by-and-by the rovers straggled back to camp fortified with responsible appetites .
and then the destruction of the good things began .
after the feast there was a refreshing season of rest and chat in the shade of spreading oaks .
by-and-by somebody shouted : `` who 's ready for the cave ? ''
everybody was .
bundles of candles were procured , and straightway there was a general scamper up the hill .
the mouth of the cave was up the hillside .
an opening shaped like a letter a. its massive oaken door stood unbarred .
within was a small chamber .
chilly as an icehouse , and walled by nature with solid limestone that was dewy with a cold sweat .
it was romantic and mysterious to stand here in the deep gloom
and look out upon the green valley shining in the sun .
but the impressiveness of the situation quickly wore off , and the romping began again .
the moment a candle was lighted there was a general rush upon the owner of it .
a struggle and a gallant defence followed .
but the candle was soon knocked down or blown out .
and then there was a glad clamor of laughter and a new chase .
but all things have an end .
by-and-by the procession went filing down the steep descent of the main avenue .
the flickering rank of lights dimly revealing the lofty walls of
rock almost to their point of junction sixty feet overhead .
this main avenue was not more than eight or ten feet wide .
every few steps other lofty and still narrower crevices branched from it on either hand .
for mcdougal 's cave was but a vast labyrinth of crooked aisles
that ran into each other and out again and led nowhere .
it was said that one might wander days and nights together through its intricate tangle of rifts and chasms .
and never find the end of the cave .
and that he might go down .
and down , and still down , into the earth , and it was just the same .
labyrinth under labyrinth , and no end to any of them .
no man `` knew '' the cave .
that was an impossible thing .
most of the young men knew a portion of it .
and it was not customary to venture much beyond this known portion .
tom sawyer knew as much of the cave as any one .
the procession moved along the main avenue some three-quarters of a mile .
and then groups and couples began to slip aside into branch avenues .
fly along the dismal corridors , and take each other by surprise at points where the corridors joined again .
parties were able to elude each other for the space of
half an hour without going beyond the '' known '' ground .
by-and-by .
one group after another came straggling back to the mouth of the cave .
panting .
hilarious .
smeared from head to foot with tallow drippings .
daubed with clay , and entirely delighted with the success of the day .
then they were astonished to find that they had been taking
no note of time and that night was about at hand .
the clanging bell had been calling for half an hour .
however , this sort of close to the day's adventures was romantic and therefore satisfactory .
when the ferryboat with her wild freight pushed into the stream .
nobody cared sixpence for the wasted time but the captain of the craft .
huck was already upon his watch when the ferryboat 's lights went glinting past the wharf .
he heard no noise on board .
for the young people were as subdued and still as people usually are who are nearly tired to death .
he wondered what boat it was , and why she did not stop at the wharf .
and then he dropped her out of his mind and put his attention upon his business .
the night was growing cloudy and dark .
ten o'clock came .
and the noise of vehicles ceased .
scattered lights began to wink out .
all straggling foot-passengers disappeared .
the village betook itself to its slumbers and left the small watcher alone with the silence and the ghosts .
eleven o'clock came , and the tavern lights were put out .
darkness everywhere , now .
huck waited what seemed a weary long time , but nothing happened .
his faith was weakening .
was there any use ?
was there really any use ?
why not give it up and turn in ?
a noise fell upon his ear .
he was all attention in an instant .
the alley door closed softly .
he sprang to the corner of the brick store .
the next moment two men brushed by him , and one seemed to have something under his arm .
it must be that box !
so they were going to remove the treasure .
why call tom now ?
it would be absurd .
the men would get away with the box and never be found again .
no , he would stick to their wake and follow them .
he would trust to the darkness for security from discovery .
so communing with himself .
huck stepped out and glided along behind the men .
cat-like , with bare feet , allowing them to keep just far enough ahead not to be invisible .
they moved up the river street three blocks , then turned to the left up a crossstreet .
they went straight ahead , then , until they came to the path that led up cardiff hill .
this they took .
they passed by the old welshman 's house .
halfway up the hill , without hesitating , and still climbed upward .
good , thought huck , they will bury it in the old quarry .
but they never stopped at the quarry .
they passed on , up the summit .
they plunged into the narrow path between the tall sumach bushes , and were at once hidden in the gloom .
huck closed up and shortened his distance , now , for they would never be able to see him .
he trotted along awhile .
then slackened his pace , fearing he was gaining too fast .
moved on a piece , then stopped altogether .
listened .
no sound .
none , save that he seemed to hear the beating of his own heart .
the hooting of an owl came over the hill .
ominous sound !
but no footsteps .
heavens , was everything lost !
he was about to spring with winged feet , when a man cleared his throat not four feet from him !
huck 's heart shot into his throat , but he swallowed it again .
and then he stood there shaking as if a dozen agues had taken charge of him at once .
and so weak that he thought he must surely fall to the ground .
he knew where he was .
he knew he was within five steps of the stile leading into widow douglas' grounds .
very well , he thought , let them bury it there .
it wo n't be hard to find .
now there was a voice .
a very low voice .
injun joe 's : `` damn her , maybe she 's got company .
there 's lights , late as it is . ''
`` i ca n't see any . ''
this was that stranger 's voice .
the stranger of the haunted house .
a deadly chill went to huck 's heart .
this , then , was the `` revenge '' job !
his thought was , to fly .
then he remembered that the widow douglas had been kind to him more than once .
and maybe these men were going to murder her .
he wished he dared venture to warn her .
but he knew he didn't dare .
they might come and catch him .
he thought all this and more in the moment that elapsed between the stranger 's remark and injun joe's next .
which was .
`` because the bush is in your way .
now .
this way .
now you see , do n't you ? ''
`` yes .
well , there is company there , i reckon .
better give it up . ''
`` give it up , and i just leaving this country forever !
give it up and maybe never have another chance .
i tell you again , as i 've told you before , i do n't care for her swag .
you may have it .
but her husband was rough on me .
many times he was rough on me .
and mainly he was the justice of the peace that jugged me for a vagrant .
and that ai n't all .
it ain't a millionth part of it !
he had me horsewhipped ! .
horsewhipped in front of the jail , like a nigger ! .
with all the town looking on !
horsewhipped ! .
do you understand ?
he took advantage of me and died .
but i 'll take it out of her . ''
`` oh , do n't kill her !
do n't do that ! ''
`` kill ?
who said anything about killing ?
i would kill him if he was here .
but not her .
when you want to get revenge on a woman you don't kill her .
bosh !
you go for her looks .
you slit her nostrils .
you notch her ears like a sow ! ''
`` by god , that's. ``
`` keep your opinion to yourself !
it will be safest for you .
i 'll tie her to the bed .
if she bleeds to death , is that my fault ?
i 'll not cry , if she does .
my friend , you 'll help me in this thing .
for my sake .
that's why you 're here .
i might n't be able alone .
if you flinch , i 'll kill you .
do you understand that ?
and if i have to kill you , i 'll kill her .
and then i reckon nobody 'll ever know much about who done this business . ''
`` well , if it 's got to be done , let 's get at it .
the quicker the better .
i 'm all in a shiver . ''
`` do it now ?
and company there ?
look here .
i 'll get suspicious of you , first thing you know .
no .
we 'll wait till the lights are out .
there 's no hurry . ''
huck felt that a silence was going to ensue .
a thing still more awful than any amount of murderous talk .
so he held his breath and stepped gingerly back .
planted his foot carefully and firmly .
after balancing .
one-legged , in a precarious way and almost toppling over , first on one side and then on the other .
he took another step back , with the same elaboration and the same risks .
then another and another , and .
a twig snapped under his foot !
his breath stopped and he listened .
there was no sound .
the stillness was perfect .
his gratitude was measureless .
now he turned in his tracks , between the walls of sumach bushes .
turned himself as carefully as if he were a ship .
and then stepped quickly but cautiously along .
when he emerged at the quarry he felt secure , and so he picked up his nimble heels and flew .
down , down he sped , till he reached the welshman 's .
he banged at the door .
and presently the heads of the old man and his two stalwart sons were thrust from windows .
`` what 's the row there ?
who 's banging ?
what do you want ? ''
`` let me in .
quick !
i 'll tell everything . ''
`` why , who are you ? ''
`` huckleberry finn .
quick , let me in ! ''
`` huckleberry finn , indeed !
it ai n't a name to open many doors , i judge !
but let him in , lads , and let 's see what 's the trouble . ''
`` please do n't ever tell i told you , '' were huck 's first words when he got in .
`` please do n't .
i 'd be killed , sure .
but the widow 's been good friends to me sometimes , and i want to tell .
i will tell if you 'll promise you wo n't ever say it was me . ''
`` by george , he has got something to tell , or he would n't act so ! ''
exclaimed the old man .
`` out with it and nobody here 'll ever tell , lad . ''
three minutes later the old man and his sons .
well armed .
were up the hill , and just entering the sumach path on tiptoe , their weapons in their hands .
huck accompanied them no further .
he hid behind a great bowlder and fell to listening .
there was a lagging .
anxious silence , and then all of a sudden there was an explosion of firearms and a cry .
huck waited for no particulars .
he sprang away and sped down the hill as fast as his legs could carry him .
as the earliest suspicion of dawn appeared on sunday morning .
huck came groping up the hill and rapped gently at the old welshman 's door .
the inmates were asleep .
but it was a sleep that was set on a hair-trigger .
on account of the exciting episode of the night .
a call came from a window : `` who 's there ! ''
huck 's scared voice answered in a low tone : `` please let me in !
it 's only huck finn ! ''
`` it 's a name that can open this door night or day , lad ! .
and welcome ! ''
these were strange words to the vagabond boy 's ears , and the pleasantest he had ever heard .
he could not recollect that the closing word had ever been applied in his case before .
the door was quickly unlocked , and he entered .
huck was given a seat and the old man and his brace of tall sons speedily dressed themselves .
`` now .
my boy .
i hope you 're good and hungry .
because breakfast will be ready as soon as the sun 's up .
and we 'll have a piping hot one , too .
make yourself easy about that !
i and the boys hoped you 'd turn up and stop here last night . ''
`` i was awful scared , '' said huck , `` and i run .
i took out when the pistols went off , and i did n't stop for three mile .
i 've come now becuz i wanted to know about it , you know .
and i come before daylight becuz i didn't want to run across them devils .
even if they was dead . ''
`` well , poor chap , you do look as if you 'd had a hard night of it .
but there 's a bed here for you when you 've had your breakfast .
no , they ai n't dead , lad .
we are sorry enough for that .
you see we knew right where to put our hands on them , by your description .
so we crept along on tiptoe till we got within fifteen feet of them .
dark as a cellar that sumach path was .
and just then i found i was going to sneeze .
it was the meanest kind of luck !
i tried to keep it back , but no use .
't was bound to come , and it did come !
i was in the lead with my pistol raised .
and when the sneeze started those scoundrels a-rustling to get out of the path .
i sung out , 'fire boys ! '
and blazed away at the place where the rustling was .
so did the boys .
but they were off in a jiffy , those villains , and we after them , down through the woods .
i judge we never touched them .
they fired a shot apiece as they started .
but their bullets whizzed by and did n't do us any harm .
as soon as we lost the sound of their feet we quit chasing .
and went down and stirred up the constables .
they got a posse together .
and went off to guard the river bank .
and as soon as it is light the sheriff and a gang are going to beat up the woods .
my boys will be with them presently .
i wish we had some sort of description of those rascals .
'twould help a good deal .
but you could n't see what they were like , in the dark , lad , i suppose ? ''
`` oh yes .
i saw them downtown and follered them . ''
`` splendid !
describe them .
describe them , my boy ! ''
`` one 's the old deaf and dumb spaniard that 's ben around here once or twice .
and t'other 's a mean-looking , ragged. ``
`` that 's enough , lad , we know the men !
happened on them in the woods back of the widow 's one day , and they slunk away .
off with you , boys , and tell the sheriff .
get your breakfast tomorrow morning ! ''
the welshman 's sons departed at once .
as they were leaving the room huck sprang up and exclaimed : `` oh .
please do n't tell anybody it was me that blowed on them !
oh , please ! ''
`` all right if you say it .
huck , but you ought to have the credit of what you did . ''
`` oh no , no !
please do n't tell ! ''
when the young men were gone , the old welshman said : `` they wo n't tell .
and i wo n't .
but why do n't you want it known ? ''
huck would not explain .
further than to say that he already knew too much about one of those men and
would not have the man know that he knew anything against him for the whole world .
he would be killed for knowing it , sure .
the old man promised secrecy once more .
and said : `` how did you come to follow these fellows , lad ?
were they looking suspicious ? ''
huck was silent while he framed a duly cautious reply .
then he said : `` well , you see , i 'm a kind of a hard lot , .
least everybody says so , and i do n't see nothing agin it .
and sometimes i ca n't sleep much .
on account of thinking about it and sort of trying to strike out a new way of doing .
that was the way of it last night .
i could n't sleep .
and so i come along upstreet 'bout midnight .
a-turning it all over .
and when i got to that old shackly brick store by the temperance tavern .
i backed up agin the wall to have another think .
well .
just then along comes these two chaps slipping along close by me .
with something under their arm , and i reckoned they 'd stole it .
one was a-smoking , and t'other one wanted a light .
so they stopped right before me and the cigars lit up their faces
and i see that the big one was the deaf and dumb spaniard .
by his white whiskers and the patch on his eye .
and t'other one was a rusty , ragged-looking devil . ''
`` could you see the rags by the light of the cigars ? ''
this staggered huck for a moment .
then he said : `` well , i do n't know .
but somehow it seems as if i did . ''
`` then they went on , and you. ``
`` follered 'em .
yes .
that was it .
i wanted to see what was up .
they sneaked along so .
i dogged 'em to the widder 's stile .
and stood in the dark and heard the ragged one beg for the widder .
and the spaniard swear he'd spile her looks just as i told you and your two. ``
`` what !
the deaf and dumb man said all that ! ''
huck had made another terrible mistake !
he was trying his best to keep the old man from
getting the faintest hint of who the spaniard might be .
and yet his tongue seemed determined to get him into trouble in spite of all he could do .
he made several efforts to creep out of his scrape .
but the old man 's eye was upon him and he made blunder after blunder .
presently the welshman said : `` my boy , do n't be afraid of me .
i would n't hurt a hair of your head for all the world .
no .
i 'd protect you .
i 'd protect you .
this spaniard is not deaf and dumb .
you 've let that slip without intending it .
you can't cover that up now .
you know something about that spaniard that you want to keep dark .
now trust me .
tell me what it is , and trust me .
i won't betray you . ''
huck looked into the old man 's honest eyes a moment .
then bent over and whispered in his ear : `` 'tai n't a spaniard .
it 's injun joe ! ''
the welshman almost jumped out of his chair .
in a moment he said : `` it 's all plain enough , now .
when you talked about notching ears and slitting noses i judged that that was your own embellishment .
because white men do n't take that sort of revenge .
but an injun !
that 's a different matter altogether . ''
during breakfast the talk went on .
and in the course of it the old man said that
the last thing which he and his sons had done .
before going to bed .
was to get a lantern and examine the stile and its vicinity for marks of blood .
they found none , but captured a bulky bundle of .
`` of what ? ''
if the words had been lightning they could not have leaped
with a more stunning suddenness from huck 's blanched lips .
his eyes were staring wide , now , and his breath suspended .
waiting for the answer .
the welshman started .
stared in return .
three seconds .
five seconds .
ten .
then replied : `` of burglar 's tools .
why , what 's the matter with you ? ''
huck sank back , panting gently , but deeply , unutterably grateful .
the welshman eyed him gravely , curiously .
and presently said : `` yes , burglar 's tools .
that appears to relieve you a good deal .
but what did give you that turn ?
what were you expecting we 'd found ? ''
huck was in a close place .
the inquiring eye was upon him .
he would have given anything for material for a plausible answer .
nothing suggested itself .
the inquiring eye was boring deeper and deeper .
a senseless reply offered .
there was no time to weigh it , so at a venture he uttered it .
feebly : `` sunday-school books , maybe . ''
poor huck was too distressed to smile .
but the old man laughed loud and joyously .
shook up the details of his anatomy from head to foot .
and ended by saying that such a laugh was money in a-man 's pocket .
because it cut down the doctor 's bill like everything .
then he added : `` poor old chap , you 're white and jaded .
you ai n't well a bit .
no wonder you 're a little flighty and off your balance .
but you 'll come out of it .
rest and sleep will fetch you out all right , i hope . ''
huck was irritated to think he had been such a goose and betrayed such a suspicious excitement .
for he had dropped the idea that the parcel brought from the tavern was the treasure .
as soon as he had heard the talk at the widow 's stile .
he had only thought it was not the treasure , however .
he had not known that it was n't .
and so the suggestion of a captured bundle was too much for his self-possession .
but on the whole he felt glad the little episode had happened .
for now he knew beyond all question that that bundle was not the bundle .
and so his mind was at rest and exceedingly comfortable .
in fact , everything seemed to be drifting just in the right direction , now .
the treasure must be still in no .
2 .
the men would be captured and jailed that day .
and he and tom could seize the gold that night without any trouble or any fear of interruption .
just as breakfast was completed there was a knock at the door .
huck jumped for a hiding-place , for he had no mind to be connected even remotely with the late event .
the welshman admitted several ladies and gentlemen .
among them the widow douglas , and noticed that groups of citizens were climbing up the hill .
to stare at the stile .
so the news had spread .
the welshman had to tell the story of the night to the visitors .
the widow 's gratitude for her preservation was outspoken .
`` do n't say a word about it , madam .
there 's another that you 're more beholden to than you are to me and my boys .
maybe , but he do n't allow me to tell his name .
we would n't have been there but for him . ''
of course this excited a curiosity so vast that it almost belittled the main matter .
but the welshman allowed it to eat into the vitals of his visitors .
and through them be transmitted to the whole town , for he refused to part with his secret .
when all else had been learned .
the widow said : `` i went to sleep reading in bed and slept straight through all that noise .
why did n't you come and wake me ? ''
`` we judged it war n't worth while .
those fellows war n't likely to come again .
they had n't any tools left to work with .
and what was the use of waking you up and scaring you to death ?
my three negro men stood guard at your house all the rest of the night .
they 've just come back . ''
more visitors came , and the story had to be told and retold for a couple of hours more .
there was no sabbath-school during day-school vacation , but everybody was early at church .
the stirring event was well canvassed .
news came that not a sign of the two villains had been yet discovered .
when the sermon was finished .
judge thatcher 's wife dropped alongside of mrs. harper as she moved down the aisle
with the crowd and said : `` is my becky going to sleep all day ?
i just expected she would be tired to death . ''
`` your becky ? ''
`` yes , '' with a startled look .
`` did n't she stay with you last night ? ''
`` why , no . ''
mrs. thatcher turned pale .
and sank into a pew , just as aunt polly , talking briskly with a friend , passed by .
aunt polly said : `` goodmorning , mrs. thatcher .
goodmorning , mrs. harper .
i 've got a boy that 's turned up missing .
i reckon my tom stayed at your house last night .
one of you .
and now he 's afraid to come to church .
i 've got to settle with him . ''
mrs. thatcher shook her head feebly and turned paler than ever .
`` he did n't stay with us , '' said mrs. harper , beginning to look uneasy .
a marked anxiety came into aunt polly 's face .
`` joe harper , have you seen my tom this morning ? ''
`` no 'm . ''
`` when did you see him last ? ''
joe tried to remember , but was not sure he could say .
the people had stopped moving out of church .
whispers passed along , and a boding uneasiness took possession of every countenance .
children were anxiously questioned , and young teachers .
they all said they had not noticed whether tom and becky were on board the ferryboat on the homeward trip .
it was dark .
no one thought of inquiring if any one was missing .
one young man finally blurted out his fear that they were still in the cave !
mrs. thatcher swooned away .
aunt polly fell to crying and wringing her hands .
the alarm swept from lip to lip .
from group to group .
from street to street , and within five minutes the bells were wildly clanging and the whole town was up !
the cardiff hill episode sank into instant insignificance .
the burglars were forgotten .
horses were saddled .
skiffs were manned .
the ferryboat ordered out .
and before the horror was half an hour old .
two hundred men were pouring down highroad and river toward the cave .
all the long afternoon the village seemed empty and dead .
many women visited aunt polly and mrs. thatcher and tried to comfort them .
they cried with them , too , and that was still better than words .
all the tedious night the town waited for news .
but when the morning dawned at last , all the word that came was , `` send more candles .
and send food . ''
mrs. thatcher was almost crazed .
and aunt polly , also .
judge thatcher sent messages of hope and encouragement from the cave , but they conveyed no real cheer .
the old welshman came home toward daylight , spattered with candle-grease , smeared with clay , and almost worn out .
he found huck still in the bed that had been provided for him , and delirious with fever .
the physicians were all at the cave , so the widow douglas came and took charge of the patient .
she said she would do her best by him .
because .
whether he was good .
bad .
or indifferent .
he was the lord 's , and nothing that was the lord 's was a thing to be neglected .
the welshman said huck had good spots in him .
and the widow said : `` you can depend on it .
that 's the lord 's mark .
he do n't leave it off .
he never does .
puts it somewhere on every creature that comes from his hands . ''
early in the forenoon parties of jaded men began to straggle into the village .
but the strongest of the citizens continued searching .
all the news that could be gained was that remotenesses of
the cavern were being ransacked that had never been visited before .
that every corner and crevice was going to be thoroughly searched .
that wherever one wandered through the maze of passages .
lights were to be seen flitting hither and thither in the distance .
and shoutings and pistol-shots sent their hollow reverberations to the ear down the sombre aisles .
in one place .
far from the section usually traversed by tourists .
the names `` becky & tom '' had been found traced upon the rocky wall with candle-smoke .
and near at hand a grease-soiled bit of ribbon .
mrs. thatcher recognized the ribbon and cried over it .
she said it was the last relic she should ever have of her child .
and that no other memorial of her could ever be so precious .
because this one parted latest from the living body before the awful death came .
some said that now and then .
in the cave .
a far-away speck of light would glimmer .
and then a glorious shout would burst forth and a score of men go trooping down the echoing aisle .
and then a sickening disappointment always followed .
the children were not there .
it was only a searcher 's light .
three dreadful days and nights dragged their tedious hours along , and the village sank into a hopeless stupor .
no one had heart for anything .
the accidental discovery .
just made .
that the proprietor of the temperance tavern kept liquor on his premises .
scarcely fluttered the public pulse , tremendous as the fact was .
in a lucid interval , huck feebly led up to the subject of taverns , and finally asked .
dimly dreading the worst .
if anything had been discovered at the temperance tavern since he had been ill. `` yes .
'' said the widow .
huck started up in bed , wildeyed : `` what ?
what was it ? ''
`` liquor ! .
and the place has been shut up .
lie down , child .
what a turn you did give me ! ''
`` only tell me just one thing .
only just one .
please !
was it tom sawyer that found it ? ''
the widow burst into tears .
`` hush , hush , child , hush !
i 've told you before , you must not talk .
you are very , very sick ! ''
then nothing but liquor had been found .
there would have been a great powwow if it had been the gold .
so the treasure was gone forever .
gone forever !
but what could she be crying about ?
curious that she should cry .
these thoughts worked their dim way through huck 's mind .
and under the weariness they gave him he fell asleep .
the widow said to herself : `` there .
he 's asleep , poor wreck .
tom sawyer find it !
pity but somebody could find tom sawyer !
ah .
there ai n't many left .
now , that 's got hope enough , or strength enough , either , to go on searching . ''
now to return to tom and becky 's share in the picnic .
they tripped along the murky aisles with the rest of the company , visiting the familiar wonders of the cave .
wonders dubbed with rather over-descriptive names .
such as `` the drawing-room .
'' `` the cathedral , '' `` aladdin 's palace , '' and so on .
presently the hide-and-seek frolicking began .
and tom and becky engaged in it with zeal until the exertion began to grow a trifle wearisome .
then they wandered down a sinuous avenue holding their candles aloft and reading the tangled webwork of names .
dates , postoffice addresses , and mottoes with which the rocky walls had been frescoed ( in candle-smoke ) .
still drifting along and talking .
they scarcely noticed that they were now in a part of the cave whose walls were not frescoed .
they smoked their own names under an overhanging shelf and moved on .
presently they came to a place where a little stream of water .
trickling over a ledge and carrying a limestone sediment with it .
had , in the slow-dragging ages , formed a laced and ruffled niagara in gleaming and imperishable stone .
tom squeezed his small body behind it in order to illuminate it for becky 's gratification .
he found that it curtained a sort of steep natural stairway which was enclosed between narrow walls .
and at once the ambition to be a discoverer seized him .
becky responded to his call , and they made a smoke-mark for future guidance , and started upon their quest .
they wound this way and that .
far down into the secret depths of the cave .
made another mark , and branched off in search of novelties to tell the upper world about .
in one place they found a spacious cavern .
from whose ceiling depended a multitude of shining stalactites of the length and circumference of a man 's leg .
they walked all about it .
wondering and admiring , and presently left it by one of the numerous passages that opened into it .
this shortly brought them to a bewitching spring , whose basin was incrusted with a frostwork of glittering crystals .
it was in the midst of a cavern whose walls were supported by many fantastic
pillars which had been formed by the joining of great stalactites and stalagmites together .
the result of the ceaseless water-drip of centuries .
under the roof vast knots of bats had packed themselves together , thousands in a bunch .
the lights disturbed the creatures and they came flocking down by hundreds , squeaking and darting furiously at the candles .
tom knew their ways and the danger of this sort of conduct .
he seized becky 's hand and hurried her into the first corridor that offered .
and none too soon .
for a bat struck becky 's light out with its wing while she was passing out of the cavern .
the bats chased the children a good distance .
but the fugitives plunged into every new passage that offered , and at last got rid of the perilous things .
tom found a subterranean lake .
shortly , which stretched its dim length away until its shape was lost in the shadows .
he wanted to explore its borders .
but concluded that it would be best to sit down and rest awhile , first .
now .
for the first time .
the deep stillness of the place laid a clammy hand upon the spirits of the children .
becky said : `` why .
i did n't notice , but it seems ever so long since i heard any of the others . ''
`` come to think , becky , we are away down below them .
and i do n't know how far away north , or south , or east , or whichever it is .
we could n't hear them here . ''
becky grew apprehensive .
`` i wonder how long we 've been down here , tom ?
we better start back . ''
`` yes , i reckon we better .
p'raps we better . ''
`` can you find the way , tom ?
it 's all a mixed-up crookedness to me . ''
`` i reckon i could find it .
but then the bats .
if they put our candles out it will be an awful fix .
let 's try some other way , so as not to go through there . ''
`` well .
but i hope we wo n't get lost .
it would be so awful ! ''
and the girl shuddered at the thought of the dreadful possibilities .
they started through a corridor .
and traversed it in silence a long way .
glancing at each new opening , to see if there was anything familiar about the look of it .
but they were all strange .
every time tom made an examination .
becky would watch his face for an encouraging sign .
and he would say cheerily : `` oh , it 's all right .
this ai n't the one , but we 'll come to it right away ! ''
but he felt less and less hopeful with each failure .
and presently began to turn off into diverging avenues at sheer random .
in desperate hope of finding the one that was wanted .
he still said it was `` all right .
'' but there was such a leaden dread at his heart that the
words had lost their ring and sounded just as if he had said .
`` all is lost ! ''
becky clung to his side in an anguish of fear .
and tried hard to keep back the tears , but they would come .
at last she said : `` oh .
tom , never mind the bats , let 's go back that way !
we seem to get worse and worse off all the time . ''
`` listen ! ''
said he .
profound silence .
silence so deep that even their breathings were conspicuous in the hush .
tom shouted .
the call went echoing down the empty aisles and died out in the
distance in a faint sound that resembled a ripple of mocking laughter .
`` oh , do n't do it again , tom , it is too horrid , '' said becky .
`` it is horrid , but i better , becky .
they might hear us , you know , '' and he shouted again .
the `` might '' was even a chillier horror than the ghostly laughter , it so confessed a perishing hope .
the children stood still and listened .
but there was no result .
tom turned upon the back track at once , and hurried his steps .
it was but a little while before a certain indecision in his manner revealed another fearful fact to becky .
he could not find his way back !
`` oh , tom , you did n't make any marks ! ''
`` becky , i was such a fool !
such a fool !
i never thought we might want to come back !
no .
i ca n't find the way .
it 's all mixed up . ''
`` tom , tom , we 're lost !
we 're lost !
we never can get out of this awful place !
oh , why did we ever leave the others ! ''
she sank to the ground and burst into such a frenzy of
crying that tom was appalled with the idea that she might die .
or lose her reason .
he sat down by her and put his arms around her .
she buried her face in his bosom .
she clung to him .
she poured out her terrors , her unavailing regrets , and the far echoes turned them all to jeering laughter .
tom begged her to pluck up hope again , and she said she could not .
he fell to blaming and abusing himself for getting her into this miserable situation .
this had a better effect .
she said she would try to hope again .
she would get up and follow wherever he might lead if only he would not talk like that any more .
for he was no more to blame than she , she said .
so they moved on again .
aimlessly .
simply at random .
all they could do was to move , keep moving .
for a little while , hope made a show of reviving .
not with any reason to back it .
but only because it is its nature to revive when the spring has
not been taken out of it by age and familiarity with failure .
by-and-by tom took becky 's candle and blew it out .
this economy meant so much !
words were not needed .
becky understood , and her hope died again .
she knew that tom had a whole candle and three or four pieces in his pockets .
yet he must economize .
by-and-by , fatigue began to assert its claims .
the children tried to pay attention .
for it was dreadful to think of sitting down when time was grown to be so precious .
moving , in some direction , in any direction , was at least progress and might bear fruit .
but to sit down was to invite death and shorten its pursuit .
at last becky 's frail limbs refused to carry her farther .
she sat down .
tom rested with her .
and they talked of home .
and the friends there , and the comfortable beds and , above all , the light !
becky cried .
and tom tried to think of some way of comforting her .
but all his encouragements were grown thread-bare with use , and sounded like sarcasms .
fatigue bore so heavily upon becky that she drowsed off to sleep .
tom was grateful .
he sat looking into her drawn face and saw it grow smooth and natural under the influence of pleasant dreams .
and by-and-by a smile dawned and rested there .
the peaceful face reflected somewhat of peace and healing into his own spirit .
and his thoughts wandered away to bygone times and dreamy memories .
while he was deep in his musings , becky woke up with a breezy little laugh .
but it was stricken dead upon her lips , and a groan followed it .
`` oh , how could i sleep !
i wish i never , never had waked !
no !
no , i do n't , tom !
do n't look so !
i wo n't say it again . ''
`` i 'm glad you 've slept , becky .
you 'll feel rested , now , and we 'll find the way out . ''
`` we can try , tom .
but i 've seen such a beautiful country in my dream .
i reckon we are going there . ''
`` maybe not , maybe not .
cheer up , becky , and let 's go on trying . ''
they rose up and wandered along , hand in hand and hopeless .
they tried to estimate how long they had been in the cave .
but all they knew was that it seemed days and weeks .
and yet it was plain that this could not be , for their candles were not gone yet .
a long time after this .
they could not tell how long .
tom said they must go softly and listen for dripping water .
they must find a spring .
they found one presently , and tom said it was time to rest again .
both were cruelly tired , yet becky said she thought she could go a little farther .
she was surprised to hear tom dissent .
she could not understand it .
they sat down , and tom fastened his candle to the wall in front of them with some clay .
thought was soon busy .
nothing was said for some time .
then becky broke the silence : `` tom , i am so hungry ! ''
tom took something out of his pocket .
`` do you remember this ? ''
said he .
becky almost smiled .
`` it 's our wedding-cake , tom . ''
`` yes .
i wish it was as big as a barrel , for it 's all we 've got . ''
`` i saved it from the picnic for us to dream on .
tom , the way grownup people do with wedding-cake .
but it 'll be our. ``
she dropped the sentence where it was .
tom divided the cake and becky ate with good appetite , while tom nibbled at his moiety .
there was abundance of cold water to finish the feast with .
by-and-by becky suggested that they move on again .
tom was silent a moment .
then he said : `` becky , can you bear it if i tell you something ? ''
becky 's face paled , but she thought she could .
`` well , then , becky , we must stay here , where there 's water to drink .
that little piece is our last candle ! ''
becky gave loose to tears and wailings .
tom did what he could to comfort her , but with little effect .
at length becky said : `` tom ! ''
`` well , becky ? ''
`` they 'll miss us and hunt for us ! ''
`` yes , they will !
certainly they will ! ''
`` maybe they 're hunting for us now , tom . ''
`` why , i reckon maybe they are .
i hope they are . ''
`` when would they miss us , tom ? ''
`` when they get back to the boat , i reckon . ''
`` tom , it might be dark then .
would they notice we had n't come ? ''
`` i do n't know .
but anyway , your mother would miss you as soon as they got home . ''
a frightened look in becky 's face brought tom to his
senses and he saw that he had made a blunder .
becky was not to have gone home that night !
the children became silent and thoughtful .
in a moment a new burst of grief from becky showed
tom that the thing in his mind had struck hers also .
that the sabbath morning might be half spent before mrs. thatcher discovered that becky was not at mrs. harper 's .
the children fastened their eyes upon their bit of candle and watched it melt slowly and pitilessly away .
saw the half inch of wick stand alone at last .
saw the feeble flame rise and fall .
climb the thin column of smoke , linger at its top a moment , and then .
the horror of utter darkness reigned !
how long afterward it was that becky came to a slow consciousness that she was crying in tom 's arms .
neither could tell .
all that they knew was .
that after what seemed a mighty stretch of time .
both awoke out of a dead stupor of sleep and resumed their miseries once more .
tom said it might be sunday , now .
maybe monday .
he tried to get becky to talk , but her sorrows were too oppressive , all her hopes were gone .
tom said that they must have been missed long ago , and no doubt the search was going on .
he would shout and maybe some one would come .
he tried it .
but in the darkness the distant echoes sounded so hideously that he tried it no more .
the hours wasted away , and hunger came to torment the captives again .
a portion of tom 's half of the cake was left .
they divided and ate it .
but they seemed hungrier than before .
the poor morsel of food only whetted desire .
by-and-by tom said : `` sh !
did you hear that ? ''
both held their breath and listened .
there was a sound like the faintest , far-off shout .
instantly tom answered it , and leading becky by the hand , started groping down the corridor in its direction .
presently he listened again .
again the sound was heard , and apparently a little nearer .
`` it 's them ! ''
said tom .
`` they 're coming !
come along , becky .
we 're all right now ! ''
the joy of the prisoners was almost overwhelming .
their speed was slow , however , because pitfalls were somewhat common , and had to be guarded against .
they shortly came to one and had to stop .
it might be three feet deep , it might be a hundred .
there was no passing it at any rate .
tom got down on his breast and reached as far down as he could .
no bottom .
they must stay there and wait until the searchers came .
they listened .
evidently the distant shoutings were growing more distant !
a moment or two more and they had gone altogether .
the heart-sinking misery of it !
tom whooped until he was hoarse , but it was of no use .
he talked hopefully to becky .
but an age of anxious waiting passed and no sounds came again .
the children groped their way back to the spring .
the weary time dragged on .
they slept again , and awoke famished and woe-stricken .
tom believed it must be tuesday by this time .
now an idea struck him .
there were some side passages near at hand .
it would be better to explore some of these than bear the weight of the heavy time in idleness .
he took a kite-line from his pocket .
tied it to a projection .
and he and becky started , tom in the lead , unwinding the line as he groped along .
at the end of twenty steps the corridor ended in a `` jumping-off place . ''
tom got down on his knees and felt below .
and then as far around the corner as he could reach with his hands conveniently .
he made an effort to stretch yet a little farther to the right .
and at that moment .
not twenty yards away , a human hand , holding a candle , appeared from behind a rock !
tom lifted up a glorious shout , and instantly that hand was followed by the body it belonged to .
injun joe 's !
tom was paralyzed .
he could not move .
he was vastly gratified the next moment .
to see the `` spaniard '' take to his heels and get himself out of sight .
tom wondered that joe had not recognized his voice and come over and killed him for testifying in court .
but the echoes must have disguised the voice .
without doubt , that was it , he reasoned .
tom's fright weakened every muscle in his body .
he said to himself that if he had strength enough to get back to the spring he would stay there .
and nothing should tempt him to run the risk of meeting injun joe again .
he was careful to keep from becky what it was he had seen .
he told her he had only shouted `` for luck . ''
but hunger and wretchedness rise superior to fears in the long run .
another tedious wait at the spring and another long sleep brought changes .
the children awoke tortured with a raging hunger .
tom believed that it must be wednesday or thursday or even friday or saturday .
now , and that the search had been given over .
he proposed to explore another passage .
he felt willing to risk injun joe and all other terrors .
but becky was very weak .
she had sunk into a dreary apathy and would not be roused .
she said she would wait , now , where she was , and die .
it would not be long .
she told tom to go with the kite-line and explore if he chose .
but she implored him to come back every little while and speak to her .
and she made him promise that when the awful time came .
he would stay by her and hold her hand until all was over .
tom kissed her .
with a choking sensation in his throat .
and made a show of being confident of finding the searchers or an escape from the cave .
then he took the kite-line in his hand and went groping
down one of the passages on his hands and knees .
distressed with hunger and sick with bodings of coming doom .
tuesday afternoon came , and waned to the twilight .
the village of st. petersburg still mourned .
the lost children had not been found .
public prayers had been offered up for them .
and many and many a private prayer that had the petitioner 's whole heart in it .
but still no good news came from the cave .
the majority of the searchers had given up the quest and gone back to their daily avocations .
saying that it was plain the children could never be found .
mrs. thatcher was very ill , and a great part of the time delirious .
people said it was heartbreaking to hear her call her child .
and raise her head and listen a whole minute at a time .
then lay it wearily down again with a moan .
aunt polly had drooped into a settled melancholy , and her gray hair had grown almost white .
the village went to its rest on tuesday night , sad and forlorn .
away in the middle of the night a wild peal burst from the village bells .
and in a moment the streets were swarming with frantic half-clad people , who shouted , `` turn out !
turn out !
they 're found !
they 're found ! ''
tin pans and horns were added to the din .
the population massed itself and moved toward the river .
met the children coming in an open carriage drawn by shouting citizens .
thronged around it , joined its homeward march , and swept magnificently up the main street roaring huzzah after huzzah !
the village was illuminated .
nobody went to bed again .
it was the greatest night the little town had ever seen .
during the first half-hour a procession of villagers filed through judge thatcher 's house .
seized the saved ones and kissed them , squeezed mrs. thatcher 's hand , tried to speak but could n't .
and drifted out raining tears all over the place .
aunt polly 's happiness was complete , and mrs. thatcher 's nearly so .
it would be complete .
however .
as soon as the messenger dispatched with the great news to the cave should get the word to her husband .
tom lay upon a sofa with an eager auditory about him and told the history of the wonderful adventure .
putting in many striking additions to adorn it withal .
and closed with a description of how he left becky and went on an exploring expedition .
how he followed two avenues as far as his kite-line would reach .
how he followed a third to the fullest stretch of the kite-line .
and was about to turn back when he glimpsed a far-off speck that looked like daylight .
dropped the line and groped toward it .
pushed his head and shoulders through a small hole , and saw the broad mississippi rolling by !
and if it had only happened to be night he would not have seen
that speck of daylight and would not have explored that passage any more !
he told how he went back for becky and broke the good
news and she told him not to fret her with such stuff .
for she was tired , and knew she was going to die , and wanted to .
he described how he labored with her and convinced her .
and how she almost died for joy when she had groped
to where she actually saw the blue speck of daylight .
how he pushed his way out at the hole and then helped her out .
how they sat there and cried for gladness .
how some men came along in a skiff and tom hailed
them and told them their situation and their famished condition .
how the men did n't believe the wild tale at first .
`` because .
'' said they , `` you are five miles down the river below the valley the cave is in '' .
then took them aboard .
rowed to a house .
gave them supper , made them rest till two or three hours after dark and then brought them home .
before day-dawn .
judge thatcher and the handful of searchers with him were tracked out .
in the cave , by the twine clews they had strung behind them , and informed of the great news .
three days and nights of toil and hunger in the cave were not to be shaken off at once .
as tom and becky soon discovered .
they were bedridden all of wednesday and thursday .
and seemed to grow more and more tired and worn , all the time .
tom got about .
a little , on thursday , was downtown friday , and nearly as whole as ever saturday .
but becky did not leave her room until sunday .
and then she looked as if she had passed through a wasting illness .
tom learned of huck 's sickness and went to see him on friday .
but could not be admitted to the bedroom .
neither could he on saturday or sunday .
he was admitted daily after that .
but was warned to keep still about his adventure and introduce no exciting topic .
the widow douglas stayed by to see that he obeyed .
at home tom learned of the cardiff hill event .
also that the `` ragged man 's '' body had eventually been found in the river near the ferry-landing .
he had been drowned while trying to escape , perhaps .
about a fortnight after tom 's rescue from the cave .
he started off to visit huck .
who had grown plenty strong enough .
now , to hear exciting talk , and tom had some that would interest him , he thought .
judge thatcher 's house was on tom 's way , and he stopped to see becky .
the judge and some friends set tom to talking .
and some one asked him ironically if he would n't like to go to the cave again .
tom said he thought he would n't mind it .
the judge said : `` well .
there are others just like you , tom , i 've not the least doubt .
but we have taken care of that .
nobody will get lost in that cave any more . ''
`` why ? ''
`` because i had its big door sheathed with boiler iron two weeks ago , and triple-locked .
and i 've got the keys . ''
tom turned as white as a sheet .
`` what 's the matter , boy !
here , run , somebody !
fetch a glass of water ! ''
the water was brought and thrown into tom 's face .
`` ah , now you 're all right .
what was the matter with you , tom ? ''
`` oh , judge , injun joe 's in the cave ! ''
within a few minutes the news had spread .
and a dozen skiff-loads of men were on their way to mcdougal 's cave .
and the ferryboat , well filled with passengers , soon followed .
tom sawyer was in the skiff that bore judge thatcher .
when the cave door was unlocked , a sorrowful sight presented itself in the dim twilight of the place .
injun joe lay stretched upon the ground .
dead .
with his face close to the crack of the door .
as if his longing eyes had been fixed .
to the latest moment , upon the light and the cheer of the free world outside .
tom was touched , for he knew by his own experience how this wretch had suffered .
his pity was moved .
but nevertheless he felt an abounding sense of relief and security .
now .
which revealed to him in a degree which he had not fully appreciated before how vast a weight
of dread had been lying upon him since the day he lifted his voice against this bloody-minded outcast .
injun joe 's bowie-knife lay close by , its blade broken in two .
the great foundation-beam of the door had been chipped and hacked through , with tedious labor .
useless labor .
too .
it was .
for the native rock formed a sill outside it .
and upon that stubborn material the knife had wrought no effect .
the only damage done was to the knife itself .
but if there had been no stony obstruction there the labor would have been useless still .
for if the beam had been wholly cut away injun joe could not have squeezed his body under the door .
and he knew it .
so he had only hacked that place in order to be doing something .
in order to pass the weary time .
in order to employ his tortured faculties .
ordinarily one could find half a dozen bits of candle stuck around in the crevices of this vestibule .
left there by tourists .
but there were none now .
the prisoner had searched them out and eaten them .
he had also contrived to catch a few bats .
and these , also , he had eaten , leaving only their claws .
the poor unfortunate had starved to death .
in one place .
near at hand .
a stalagmite had been slowly growing up from the ground for ages .
builded by the water-drip from a stalactite overhead .
the captive had broken off the stalagmite .
and upon the stump had placed a stone .
wherein he had scooped a shallow hollow to catch the precious drop that
fell once in every three minutes with the dreary regularity of a clock-tick .
a dessertspoonful once in four and twenty hours .
that drop was falling when the pyramids were new .
when troy fell .
when the foundations of rome were laid .
when christ was crucified .
when the conqueror created the british empire .
when columbus sailed .
when the massacre at lexington was '' news . ''
it is falling now .
it will still be falling when all these things shall have sunk down the afternoon of history .
and the twilight of tradition , and been swallowed up in the thick night of oblivion .
has everything a purpose and a mission ?
did this drop fall patiently during five thousand years to be ready for this flitting human insect 's need ?
and has it another important object to accomplish ten thousand years to come ?
no matter .
it is many and many a year since the hapless half-breed scooped out the stone to catch the priceless drops .
but to this day the tourist stares longest at that pathetic stone and that
slow-dropping water when he comes to see the wonders of mcdougal 's cave .
injun joe 's cup stands first in the list of the cavern 's marvels .
even `` aladdin 's palace '' can not rival it .
injun joe was buried near the mouth of the cave .
and people flocked there in boats and wagons from the towns
and from all the farms and hamlets for seven miles around .
they brought their children .
and all sorts of provisions .
and confessed that they had had almost as satisfactory a time
at the funeral as they could have had at the hanging .
this funeral stopped the further growth of one thing .
the petition to the governor for injun joe 's pardon .
the petition had been largely signed .
many tearful and eloquent meetings had been held .
and a committee of sappy women been appointed to go in deep mourning and wail around the governor .
and implore him to be a merciful ass and trample his duty under foot .
injun joe was believed to have killed five citizens of the village , but what of that ?
if he had been satan himself there would have been plenty
of weaklings ready to scribble their names to a pardon-petition .
and drip a tear on it from their permanently impaired and leaky water-works .
the morning after the funeral tom took huck to a private place to have an important talk .
huck had learned all about tom 's adventure from the welshman and the widow douglas .
by this time , but tom said he reckoned there was one thing they had not told him .
that thing was what he wanted to talk about now .
huck 's face saddened .
he said : `` i know what it is .
you got into no .
2 and never found anything but whiskey .
nobody told me it was you .
but i just knowed it must ' a ' ben you , soon as i heard 'bout that whiskey business .
and i knowed you had n't got the money becuz you 'd ' a ' got at
me some way or other and told me even if you was mum to everybody else .
tom , something 's always told me we 'd never get holt of that swag . ''
`` why , huck , i never told on that tavern-keeper .
you know his tavern was all right the saturday i went to the picnic .
do n't you remember you was to watch there that night ? ''
`` oh yes !
why , it seems 'bout a year ago .
it was that very night that i follered injun joe to the widder 's . ''
`` you followed him ? ''
`` yes .
but you keep mum .
i reckon injun joe 's left friends behind him .
and i do n't want 'em souring on me and doing me mean tricks .
if it hadn't ben for me he 'd be down in texas now , all right . ''
then huck told his entire adventure in confidence to tom .
who had only heard of the welshman 's part of it before .
`` well .
'' said huck , presently , coming back to the main question , `` whoever nipped the whiskey in no .
2 , nipped the money , too , i reckon .
anyways it 's a goner for us , tom . ''
`` huck , that money was n't ever in no .
2 ! ''
`` what ! ''
huck searched his comrade 's face keenly .
`` tom , have you got on the track of that money again ? ''
`` huck , it 's in the cave ! ''
huck 's eyes blazed .
`` say it again , tom . ''
`` the money 's in the cave ! ''
`` tom .
honest injun , now .
is it fun , or earnest ? ''
`` earnest , huck .
just as earnest as ever i was in my life .
will you go in there with me and help get it out ? ''
`` i bet i will !
i will if it 's where we can blaze our way to it and not get lost . ''
`` huck , we can do that without the least little bit of trouble in the world . ''
`` good as wheat !
what makes you think the money's. ``
`` huck , you just wait till we get in there .
if we do n't find it i'll agree to give you
my drum and every thing i 've got in the world .
i will , by jings . ''
`` all right .
it 's a whiz .
when do you say ? ''
`` right now , if you say it .
are you strong enough ? ''
`` is it far in the cave ?
i ben on my pins a little .
three or four days , now , but i ca n't walk more ' n a mile , tom .
least i do n't think i could . ''
`` it 's about five mile into there the way anybody but me would go .
huck , but there 's a mighty short cut that they do n't anybody but me know about .
huck , i 'll take you right to it in a skiff .
i 'll float the skiff down there , and i 'll pull it back again all by myself .
you need n't ever turn your hand over . ''
`` less start right off , tom . ''
`` all right .
we want some bread and meat .
and our pipes .
and a little bag or two .
and two or three kite-strings , and some of these new-fangled things they call lucifer matches .
i tell you , many 's the time i wished i had some when i was in there before . ''
a trifle after noon the boys borrowed a small skiff from a citizen who was absent .
and got under way at once .
when they were several miles below `` cave hollow .
'' tom said : `` now you see this bluff here
looks all alike all the way down from the cave hollow .
no houses , no wood-yards , bushes all alike .
but do you see that white place up yonder where there 's been a landslide ?
well , that's one of my marks .
we 'll get ashore , now . ''
they landed .
`` now .
huck , where we 're a-standing you could touch that hole i got out of with a fishing-pole .
see if you can find it . ''
huck searched all the place about , and found nothing .
tom proudly marched into a thick clump of sumach bushes and said : `` here you are !
look at it , huck .
it 's the snuggest hole in this country .
you just keep mum about it .
all along i 've been wanting to be a robber .
but i knew i 'd got to have a thing like this .
and where to run across it was the bother .
we 've got it now .
and we 'll keep it quiet , only we'll let joe harper and ben rogers in .
because of course there 's got to be a gang .
or else there would n't be any style about it .
tom sawyer 's gang .
it sounds splendid , do n't it , huck ? ''
`` well , it just does , tom .
and who 'll we rob ? ''
`` oh , most anybody .
waylay people .
that 's mostly the way . ''
`` and kill them ? ''
`` no , not always .
hive them in the cave till they raise a ransom . ''
`` what 's a ransom ? ''
`` money .
you make them raise all they can , off ' n their friends .
and after you 've kept them a year , if it ai n't raised then you kill them .
that's the general way .
only you do n't kill the women .
you shut up the women , but you do n't kill them .
they 're always beautiful and rich , and awfully scared .
you take their watches and things , but you always take your hat off and talk polite .
they ai n't anybody as polite as robbers .
you 'll see that in any book .
well .
the women get to loving you .
and after they've been in the cave a week or two weeks they
stop crying and after that you could n't get them to leave .
if you drove them out they 'd turn right around and come back .
it 's so in all the books . ''
`` why , it 's real bully , tom .
i believe it 's better ' n to be a pirate . ''
`` yes .
it 's better in some ways , because it 's close to home and circuses and all that . ''
by this time everything was ready and the boys entered the hole , tom in the lead .
they toiled their way to the farther end of the tunnel .
then made their spliced kite-strings fast and moved on .
a few steps brought them to the spring , and tom felt a shudder quiver all through him .
he showed huck the fragment of candle-wick perched on a lump of clay against the wall .
and described how he and becky had watched the flame struggle and expire .
the boys began to quiet down to whispers .
now , for the stillness and gloom of the place oppressed their spirits .
they went on .
and presently entered and followed tom 's other corridor until they reached the '' jumping-off place . ''
the candles revealed the fact that it was not really a precipice .
but only a steep clay hill twenty or thirty feet high .
tom whispered : `` now i 'll show you something , huck . ''
he held his candle aloft and said : `` look as far around the corner as you can .
do you see that ?
there .
on the big rock over yonder .
done with candle-smoke . ''
`` tom , it 's a cross ! ''
`` now where 's your number two ?
'under the cross , ' hey ?
right yonder's where i saw injun joe poke up his candle , huck ! ''
huck stared at the mystic sign awhile .
and then said with a shaky voice : `` tom , less git out of here ! ''
`` what !
and leave the treasure ? ''
`` yes .
leave it .
injun joe 's ghost is round about there , certain . ''
`` no it ai n't , huck , no it ai n't .
it would ha'nt the place where he died .
away out at the mouth of the cave .
five mile from here . ''
`` no , tom , it would n't .
it would hang round the money .
i know the ways of ghosts , and so do you . ''
tom began to fear that huck was right .
mis-givings gathered in his mind .
but presently an idea occurred to him .
`` lookyhere , huck , what fools we 're making of ourselves !
injun joe's ghost ai n't a going to come around where there 's a cross ! ''
the point was well taken .
it had its effect .
`` tom , i did n't think of that .
but that 's so .
it 's luck for us , that cross is .
i reckon we 'll climb down there and have a hunt for that box . ''
tom went first , cutting rude steps in the clay hill as he descended .
huck followed .
four avenues opened out of the small cavern which the great rock stood in .
the boys examined three of them with no result .
they found a small recess in the one nearest the base of the rock .
with a pallet of blankets spread down in it .
also an old suspender , some bacon rind , and the well-gnawed bones of two or three fowls .
but there was no moneybox .
the lads searched and researched this place , but in vain .
tom said : `` he said under the cross .
well , this comes nearest to being under the cross .
it ca n't be under the rock itself , because that sets solid on the ground . ''
they searched everywhere once more , and then sat down discouraged .
huck could suggest nothing .
by-and-by tom said : `` lookyhere .
huck .
there 's footprints and some candle-grease on the clay about one side of this rock .
but not on the other sides .
now , what's that for ?
i bet you the money is under the rock .
i 'm going to dig in the clay . ''
`` that ai n't no bad notion , tom ! ''
said huck with animation .
tom 's `` real barlow '' was out at once .
and he had not dug four inches before he struck wood .
`` hey , huck ! .
you hear that ? ''
huck began to dig and scratch now .
some boards were soon uncovered and removed .
they had concealed a natural chasm which led under the rock .
tom got into this and held his candle as far under the rock as he could .
but said he could not see to the end of the rift .
he proposed to explore .
he stooped and passed under .
the narrow way descended gradually .
he followed its winding course , first to the right , then to the left , huck at his heels .
tom turned a short curve , by-and-by , and exclaimed : `` my goodness , huck , lookyhere ! ''
it was the treasure-box .
sure enough .
occupying a snug little cavern .
along with an empty powder-keg .
a couple of guns in leather cases .
two or three pairs of old moccasins .
a leather belt , and some other rubbish well soaked with the water-drip .
`` got it at last ! ''
said huck , ploughing among the tarnished coins with his hand .
`` my , but we 're rich , tom ! ''
`` huck , i always reckoned we 'd get it .
it 's just too good to believe , but we have got it , sure !
say .
let 's not fool around here .
let 's snake it out .
lem me see if i can lift the box . ''
it weighed about fifty pounds .
tom could lift it , after an awkward fashion , but could not carry it conveniently .
`` i thought so , '' he said .
`` they carried it like it was heavy , that day at the ha'nted house .
i noticed that .
i reckon i was right to think of fetching the little bags along . ''
the money was soon in the bags and the boys took it up to the cross rock .
`` now less fetch the guns and things , '' said huck .
`` no , huck .
leave them there .
they 're just the tricks to have when we go to robbing .
we 'll keep them there all the time , and we 'll hold our orgies there , too .
it 's an awful snug place for orgies . ''
`` what orgies ? ''
`` i dono .
but robbers always have orgies , and of course we 've got to have them , too .
come along , huck , we 've been in here a long time .
it's getting late , i reckon .
i 'm hungry , too .
we 'll eat and smoke when we get to the skiff . ''
they presently emerged into the clump of sumach bushes .
looked warily out , found the coast clear , and were soon lunching and smoking in the skiff .
as the sun dipped toward the horizon they pushed out and got under way .
tom skimmed up the shore through the long twilight , chatting cheerily with huck , and landed shortly after dark .
`` now .
huck .
'' said tom .
`` we 'll hide the money in the loft of the widow's woodshed .
and i 'll come up in the morning and we 'll count it and divide .
and then we 'll hunt up a place out in the woods for it where it will be safe .
just you lay quiet here and watch the stuff till i run and hook benny taylor 's little wagon .
i wo n't be gone a minute . ''
he disappeared .
and presently returned with the wagon .
put the two small sacks into it .
threw some old rags on top of them , and started off , dragging his cargo behind him .
when the boys reached the welshman's house , they stopped to rest .
just as they were about to move on .
the welshman stepped out and said : `` hallo , who 's that ? ''
`` huck and tom sawyer . ''
`` good !
come along with me , boys , you are keeping everybody waiting .
here .
hurry up , trot ahead .
i 'll haul the wagon for you .
why , it 's not as light as it might be .
got bricks in it ? .
or old metal ? ''
`` old metal , '' said tom .
`` i judged so .
the boys in this town will take more trouble and fool away more time hunting up six bits ' worth
of old iron to sell to the foundry than they would to make twice the money at regular work .
but that's human nature .
hurry along , hurry along ! ''
the boys wanted to know what the hurry was about .
`` never mind .
you 'll see , when we get to the widow douglas ' . ''
huck said with some apprehension .
for he was long used to being falsely accused : `` mr. jones .
we have n't been doing nothing . ''
the welshman laughed .
`` well , i do n't know , huck , my boy .
i do n't know about that .
ai n't you and the widow good friends ? ''
`` yes .
well , she 's ben good friends to me , anyway . ''
`` all right , then .
what do you want to be afraid for ? ''
this question was not entirely answered in huck 's slow mind before he found himself pushed .
along with tom , into mrs. douglas ' drawing-room .
mr. jones left the wagon near the door and followed .
the place was grandly lighted , and everybody that was of any consequence in the village was there .
the thatchers were there .
the harpers , the rogerses .
aunt polly .
sid , mary .
the minister , the editor , and a great many more , and all dressed in their best .
the widow received the boys as heartily as any one could well receive two such looking beings .
they were covered with clay and candle-grease .
aunt polly blushed crimson with humiliation , and frowned and shook her head at tom .
nobody suffered half as much as the two boys did , however .
mr. jones said : `` tom was n't at home , yet , so i gave him up .
but i stumbled on him and huck right at my door .
and so i just brought them along in a hurry . ''
`` and you did just right , '' said the widow .
`` come with me , boys . ''
she took them to a bedchamber and said : `` now wash and dress yourselves .
here are two new suits of clothes .
shirts , socks , everything complete .
they 're huck 's .
no , no thanks , huck .
mr. jones bought one and i the other .
but they 'll fit both of you .
get into them .
we 'll wait .
come down when you are slicked up enough . ''
then she left .
huck said : `` tom , we can slope , if we can find a rope .
the window ain't high from the ground . ''
`` shucks !
what do you want to slope for ? ''
`` well , i ai n't used to that kind of a crowd .
i ca n't stand it .
i ain't going down there , tom . ''
`` oh , bother !
it ai n't anything .
i do n't mind it a bit .
i 'll take care of you . ''
sid appeared .
`` tom , '' said he , `` auntie has been waiting for you all the afternoon .
mary got your sunday clothes ready , and everybody 's been fretting about you .
say .
ai n't this grease and clay , on your clothes ? ''
`` now , mr. siddy , you jist 'tend to your own business .
what 's all this blowout about , anyway ? ''
`` it 's one of the widow 's parties that she 's always having .
this time it 's for the welshman and his sons .
on account of that scrape they helped her out of the other night .
and say .
i can tell you something , if you want to know . ''
`` well , what ? ''
`` why .
old mr. jones is going to try to spring something on the people here tonight .
but i overheard him tell auntie today about it .
as a secret , but i reckon it 's not much of a secret now .
everybody knows .
the widow , too , for all she tries to let on she do n't .
mr. jones was bound huck should be here .
could n't get along with his grand secret without huck , you know ! ''
`` secret about what , sid ? ''
`` about huck tracking the robbers to the widow 's .
i reckon mr. jones was going to make a grand time over his surprise .
but i bet you it will drop pretty flat . ''
sid chuckled in a very contented and satisfied way .
`` sid , was it you that told ? ''
`` oh , never mind who it was .
somebody told .
that 's enough . ''
`` sid .
there 's only one person in this town mean enough to do that , and that 's you .
if you had been in huck 's place you 'd ' a
' sneaked down the hill and never told anybody on the robbers .
you ca n't do any but mean things .
and you ca n't bear to see anybody praised for doing good ones .
there .
no thanks , as the widow says '' .
and tom cuffed sid 's ears and helped him to the door with several kicks .
`` now go and tell auntie if you dare .
and tomorrow you 'll catch it ! ''
some minutes later the widow 's guests were at the supper-table .
and a dozen children were propped up at little side-tables in the same room .
after the fashion of that country and that day .
at the proper time mr. jones made his little speech .
in which he thanked the widow for the honor she was doing himself and his sons .
but said that there was another person whose modesty .
and so forth and so on .
he sprung his secret about huck 's share in the adventure in the finest dramatic manner he was master of .
but the surprise it occasioned was largely counterfeit and not as
clamorous and effusive as it might have been under happier circumstances .
however .
the widow made a pretty fair show of astonishment .
and heaped so many compliments and so much gratitude upon huck that he almost forgot the nearly intolerable discomfort of his new
clothes in the entirely intolerable discomfort of being set up as a target for everybody 's gaze and everybody 's laudations .
the widow said she meant to give huck a home under her roof and have him educated .
and that when she could spare the money she would start him in business in a modest way .
tom 's chance was come .
he said : `` huck do n't need it .
huck 's rich . ''
nothing but a heavy strain upon the good manners of the company
kept back the due and proper complimentary laugh at this pleasant joke .
but the silence was a little awkward .
tom broke it : `` huck 's got money .
maybe you do n't believe it , but he 's got lots of it .
oh , you need n't smile .
i reckon i can show you .
you just wait a minute . ''
tom ran out of doors .
the company looked at each other with a perplexed interest .
and inquiringly at huck , who was tongue-tied .
`` sid , what ails tom ? ''
said aunt polly .
`` he .
well , there ai n't ever any making of that boy out .
i never. ``
tom entered , struggling with the weight of his sacks , and aunt polly did not finish her sentence .
tom poured the mass of yellow coin upon the table and said : `` there .
what did i tell you ?
half of it 's huck 's and half of it 's mine ! ''
the spectacle took the general breath away .
all gazed , nobody spoke for a moment .
then there was a unanimous call for an explanation .
tom said he could furnish it , and he did .
the tale was long , but brimful of interest .
there was scarcely an interruption from any one to break the charm of its flow .
when he had finished .
mr. jones said : `` i thought i had fixed up a little surprise for this occasion .
but it do n't amount to anything now .
this one makes it sing mighty small , i'm willing to allow . ''
the money was counted .
the sum amounted to a little over twelve thousand dollars .
it was more than any one present had ever seen at one time before .
though several persons were there who were worth considerably more than that in property .
the reader may rest satisfied that tom 's and huck 's windfall
made a mighty stir in the poor little village of st. petersburg .
so vast a sum , all in actual cash , seemed next to incredible .
it was talked about .
gloated over .
glorified , until the reason of many of the citizens tottered under the strain of the unhealthy excitement .
every `` haunted '' house in st. petersburg and the neighboring villages was dissected .
plank by plank , and its foundations dug up and ransacked for hidden treasure .
and not by boys , but men .
pretty grave , unromantic men , too , some of them .
wherever tom and huck appeared they were courted , admired , stared at .
the boys were not able to remember that their remarks had possessed weight before .
but now their sayings were treasured and repeated .
everything they did seemed somehow to be regarded as remarkable .
they had evidently lost the power of doing and saying commonplace things .
moreover , their past history was raked up and discovered to bear marks of conspicuous originality .
the village paper published biographical sketches of the boys .
the widow douglas put huck 's money out at six per cent. .
and judge thatcher did the same with tom 's at aunt polly 's request .
each lad had an income , now , that was simply prodigious .
a dollar for every weekday in the year and half of the sundays .
it was just what the minister got .
no , it was what he was promised .
he generally could n't collect it .
a dollar and a quarter a week would board .
lodge , and school a boy in those old simple days .
and clothe him and wash him , too , for that matter .
judge thatcher had conceived a great opinion of tom .
he said that no commonplace boy would ever have got his daughter out of the cave .
when becky told her father .
in strict confidence , how tom had taken her whipping at school , the judge was visibly moved .
and when she pleaded grace for the mighty lie which tom had told
in order to shift that whipping from her shoulders to his own .
the judge said with a fine outburst that it was a noble , a generous , a magnanimous lie .
a lie that was worthy to hold up its head and march down through
history breast to breast with george washington 's lauded truth about the hatchet !
becky thought her father had never looked so tall and so superb as
when he walked the floor and stamped his foot and said that .
she went straight off and told tom about it .
judge thatcher hoped to see tom a great lawyer or a great soldier some day .
he said he meant to look to it that tom should be admitted to the
national military academy and afterward trained in the best law school in the country .
in order that he might be ready for either career or both .
huck finn 's wealth and the fact that he was now under the widow douglas' protection introduced him into society .
no , dragged him into it , hurled him into it .
and his sufferings were almost more than he could bear .
the widow 's servants kept him clean and neat .
combed and brushed .
and they bedded him nightly in unsympathetic sheets that had not one little spot
or stain which he could press to his heart and know for a friend .
he had to eat with a knife and fork .
he had to use napkin , cup , and plate .
he had to learn his book , he had to go to church .
he had to talk so properly that speech was become insipid in his mouth .
whithersoever he turned , the bars and shackles of civilization shut him in and bound him hand and foot .
he bravely bore his miseries three weeks , and then one day turned up missing .
for forty-eight hours the widow hunted for him everywhere in great distress .
the public were profoundly concerned .
they searched high and low , they dragged the river for his body .
early the third morning tom sawyer wisely went poking among some old empty hogsheads down behind the abandoned slaughter-house .
and in one of them he found the refugee .
huck had slept there .
he had just breakfasted upon some stolen odds and ends of food .
and was lying off , now , in comfort , with his pipe .
he was unkempt .
uncombed .
and clad in the same old ruin of rags that had made
him picturesque in the days when he was free and happy .
tom routed him out , told him the trouble he had been causing , and urged him to go home .
huck 's face lost its tranquil content , and took a melancholy cast .
he said : `` do n't talk about it , tom .
i 've tried it , and it do n't work .
it don't work , tom .
it ai n't for me .
i ai n't used to it .
the widder 's good to me , and friendly .
but i ca n't stand them ways .
she makes me get up just at the same time every morning .
she makes me wash , they comb me all to thunder .
she wo n't let me sleep in the woodshed .
i got to wear them blamed clothes that just smothers me , tom .
they do n't seem to any air git through 'em , somehow .
and they 're so rotten nice that i can't set down .
nor lay down , nor roll around anywher 's .
i hai n't slid on a cellar-door for .
well , it 'pears to be years .
i got to go to church and sweat and sweat .
i hate them ornery sermons !
i ca n't ketch a fly in there , i ca n't chaw .
i got to wear shoes all sunday .
the widder eats by a bell .
she goes to bed by a bell .
she gits up by a bell .
everything 's so awful reg'lar a body ca n't stand it . ''
`` well , everybody does that way , huck . ''
`` tom , it do n't make no difference .
i ai n't everybody , and i can't stand it .
it 's awful to be tied up so .
and grub comes too easy .
i don't take no interest in vittles , that way .
i got to ask to go a-fishing .
i got to ask to go in a-swimming .
dern 'd if i hai n't got to ask to do everything .
well , i 'd got to talk so nice it was n't no comfort .
i 'd got to go up in the attic and rip out awhile .
every day , to git a taste in my mouth , or i 'd a died , tom .
the widder would n't let me smoke .
she would n't let me yell .
she would n't let me gape , nor stretch , nor scratch , before folks. ``
[ then with a spasm of special irritation and injury ] .
`` and dad fetch it , she prayed all the time !
i never see such a woman !
i had to shove , tom .
i just had to .
and besides , that school's going to open , and i 'd a had to go to it .
well , i would n't stand that , tom .
looky-here , tom , being rich ai n't what it 's cracked up to be .
it's just worry and worry , and sweat and sweat , and a-wishing you was dead all the time .
now these clothes suits me .
and this bar ' l suits me , and i ai n't ever going to shake 'em any more .
tom .
i would n't ever got into all this trouble if it had n't ' a ' ben for that money .
now you just take my sheer of it along with your ' n , and gim me a ten-center sometimes .
not many times .
becuz i do n't give a dern for a thing 'thout it 's tollable hard to git .
and you go and beg off for me with the widder . ''
`` oh , huck , you know i ca n't do that .
'tai n't fair .
and besides if you'll try this thing just a while longer you 'll come to like it . ''
`` like it !
yes .
the way i 'd like a hot stove if i was to set on it long enough .
no , tom , i wo n't be rich , and i wo n't live in them cussed smothery houses .
i like the woods , and the river , and hogsheads , and i 'll stick to 'em , too .
blame it all !
just as we 'd got guns .
and a cave .
and all just fixed to rob .
here this dern foolishness has got to come up and spile it all ! ''
tom saw his opportunity .
`` lookyhere , huck , being rich ai n't going to keep me back from turning robber . ''
`` no !
oh , good-licks .
are you in real dead-wood earnest , tom ? ''
`` just as dead earnest as i 'm sitting here .
but huck , we ca n't let you into the gang if you ai n't respectable , you know . ''
huck 's joy was quenched .
`` ca n't let me in , tom ?
did n't you let me go for a pirate ? ''
`` yes , but that 's different .
a robber is more high-toned than what a pirate is .
as a general thing .
in most countries they 're awful high up in the nobility .
dukes and such . ''
`` now , tom , hai n't you always ben friendly to me ?
you would n't shet me out , would you , tom ?
you would n't do that , now , would you , tom ? ''
`` huck , i would n't want to , and i do n't want to .
but what would people say ?
why , they 'd say , 'mph !
tom sawyer 's gang !
pretty low characters in it ! '
they 'd mean you , huck .
you would n't like that , and i would n't . ''
huck was silent for some time , engaged in a mental struggle .
finally he said : `` well .
i 'll go back to the widder for a month and
tackle it and see if i can come to stand it .
if you 'll let me b'long to the gang , tom . ''
`` all right , huck , it 's a whiz !
come along .
old chap , and i 'll ask the widow to let up on you a little , huck . ''
`` will you , tom .
now will you ?
that 's good .
if she 'll let up on some of the roughest things .
i 'll smoke private and cuss private , and crowd through or bust .
when you going to start the gang and turn robbers ? ''
`` oh , right off .
we 'll get the boys together and have the initiation tonight , maybe . ''
`` have the which ? ''
`` have the initiation . ''
`` what 's that ? ''
`` it 's to swear to stand by one another .
and never tell the gang's secrets .
even if you 're chopped all to flinders .
and kill anybody and all his family that hurts one of the gang . ''
`` that 's gay .
that 's mighty gay , tom , i tell you . ''
`` well , i bet it is .
and all that swearing 's got to be done at midnight .
in the lonesomest , awfulest place you can find .
a ha'nted house is the best , but they 're all ripped up now . ''
`` well , midnight 's good , anyway , tom . ''
`` yes , so it is .
and you 've got to swear on a coffin , and sign it with blood . ''
`` now , that 's something like !
why , it 's a million times bullier than pirating .
i 'll stick to the widder till i rot , tom .
and if i git to be a reg'lar ripper of a robber .
and everybody talking 'bout it .
i reckon she 'll be proud she snaked me in out of the wet . ''
conclusion so endeth this chronicle .
it being strictly a history of a boy , it must stop here .
the story could not go much further without becoming the history of a man .
when one writes a novel about grown people , he knows exactly where to stop .
that is , with a marriage .
but when he writes of juveniles , he must stop where he best can .
most of the characters that perform in this book still live , and are prosperous and happy .
some day it may seem worth while to take up the story of the younger
ones again and see what sort of men and women they turned out to be .
therefore it will be wisest not to reveal any of that part of their lives at present .
